                                                              Anatomy of an AI-powered
                                                               malicious social botnet
                                                             Kai-Cheng Yang∗ and Filippo Menczer
arXiv:2307.16336v1 [cs.CY] 30 Jul 2023




                                                                 Observatory on Social Media
                                                               Indiana University, Bloomington


                                                                                  Abstract
                                                    Large language models (LLMs) exhibit impressive capabilities in gen-
                                                erating realistic text across diverse subjects. Concerns have been raised
                                                that they could be utilized to produce fake content with a deceptive inten-
                                                tion, although evidence thus far remains anecdotal. This paper presents
                                                a case study about a Twitter botnet that appears to employ ChatGPT
                                                to generate human-like content. Through heuristics, we identify 1,140 ac-
                                                counts and validate them via manual annotation. These accounts form
                                                a dense cluster of fake personas that exhibit similar behaviors, including
                                                posting machine-generated content and stolen images, and engage with
                                                each other through replies and retweets. ChatGPT-generated content
                                                promotes suspicious websites and spreads harmful comments. While the
                                                accounts in the AI botnet can be detected through their coordination pat-
                                                terns, current state-of-the-art LLM content classifiers fail to discriminate
                                                between them and human accounts in the wild. These findings highlight
                                                the threats posed by AI-enabled social bots.


                                         1      Introduction
                                         Large language models (LLMs) can generate human-like text (Jakesch et al.,
                                         2023) and excel in various natural language processing tasks, including senti-
                                         ment analysis and text summarization (Ye et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2023). Such
                                         capabilities have opened up numerous potential applications (Bahrini et al.,
                                         2023), such as enhancing education (Kasneci et al., 2023) and providing re-
                                         sponses to medical questions (Ayers et al., 2023). Consequently, these tools have
                                         gained significant traction in the market. For instance, ChatGPT, a prominent
                                         LLM, amassed over 100 million users in only two months.1 Industry giants like
                                         Microsoft have integrated ChatGPT into their products,2 and Google swiftly
                                             ∗ Corresponding author; email: yangkc@iu.edu
                                             1 reuters.com/technology/chatgpt-sets-record-fastest-growing-user-base-analyst-note-2023-

                                         02-01 (Accessed May 2023)
                                            2 blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2023/02/07/reinventing-search-with-a-new-ai-powered-

                                         microsoft-bing-and-edge-your-copilot-for-the-web (Accessed May 2023)


                                                                                       1
followed suit by offering similar solutions.3
    At the same time, researchers have warned about the potential misuse of such
technologies to generate mis/disinformation and harmful content (Bommasani
et al., 2021; Yamin et al., 2021; Guembe et al., 2022; Goldstein et al., 2023).
Recent studies demonstrate that models like the GPT series are capable of pro-
ducing news articles indistinguishable from human-generated ones (Kreps et al.,
2022; Jakesch et al., 2023) and vast amounts of compelling mis/disinformation
with little human involvement (Buchanan et al., 2021; Spitale et al., 2023).
Detecting such content poses challenges for existing automated detection mod-
els (Zhou et al., 2023). LLMs can also be leveraged to scale up personalized
attacks, such as spear phishing content (Hazell, 2023). The widespread availabil-
ity of powerful language models will also significantly reduce the costs associated
with content generation and lower the technical proficiency required to conduct
such operations (Brundage et al., 2018; Weidinger et al., 2022). However, exist-
ing studies mainly consist of predictions and lab experiments. To date, evidence
of LLMs being deployed in the field for malicious purposes remains largely anec-
dotal.
    In this paper, we present a case study about a Twitter botnet that appears
to use ChatGPT to generate harmful content. Social bots are social media ac-
counts controlled in part by software and have been around for many years (Fer-
rara et al., 2016). They were found to distort online conversations and spread
misinformation in various contexts, from elections to public health crises (Shao
et al., 2018; Ferrara et al., 2020; Jamison et al., 2019; Marlow et al., 2020). Tra-
ditional social bots often follow pre-defined instructions to perform simplistic
tasks, such as spamming (Yang et al., 2019), following others, and amplifying
certain narratives (Keller et al., 2020). They typically lack the intelligence to
create realistic personas, post convincing content, or carry out natural conver-
sations with other accounts automatically (Assenmacher et al., 2020). However,
the recent advancements in and wide adoption of LLMs completely transform
this landscape. Adversarial actors can now easily leverage language models to
significantly enhance the capabilities of bots across all dimensions.
    The bot accounts in our analytical sample were identified by self-revealing
tweets they posted by accident. A combination of heuristics and manual annota-
tion yields 1,140 accounts in what we call the “fox8” botnet. An in-depth anal-
ysis of behaviors displayed by the accounts in this botnet shows that they form
a dense social network by following each other. They post machine-generated
content and steal selfies to create fake personas. They also frequently interact
with each other through retweets and replies. A closer look at the self-revealing
tweets suggests that the ChatGPT-generated content aims to promote suspi-
cious websites and spread harmful comments. We apply state-of-the-art LLM-
content detectors and find they cannot effectively distinguish between human
and LLM-powered bots in the wild.
    Our work unveils the emergence of LLM-powered social bots and highlights
the threats they pose. By focusing on a real-world botnet, we provide valuable
  3 blog.google/products/search/generative-ai-search (Accessed May 2023)




                                           2
insights into how LLMs are leveraged by adversarial actors in the field. Given
the rapid advancements in AI technologies, we anticipate the proliferation of
more advanced bot accounts across social media, serving diverse purposes. We
hope to raise public awareness about this issue and share the botnet data to
allow the research community to investigate further.


2      Related work
2.1      LLM-powered cyber threats
Machine-generated content has long been implicated in cyber-social threats,
such as phishing, mis/disinformation, and harmful content (Crothers et al.,
2022). These threats have been further exacerbated by LLMs for two main
reasons. First, LLMs beat traditional text generation methods in producing
human-like text (Jakesch et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2023; Clark et al., 2021).
This enhancement enables them to craft compelling and personalized content
for previously unseen attacks (Buchanan et al., 2021; Spitale et al., 2023; Hazell,
2023).
    Second, powerful LLMs have become readily accessible, affordable, and user-
friendly. For instance, OpenAI provides API access to their models, enabling
users to generate large volumes of content at a nominal expense.4 Interac-
tion with most LLMs happens via human language prompts (Liu et al., 2023),
enabling even those without technical skills to harness the models’ capabili-
ties. Users can also acquire knowledge on API queries and LLM prompting
directly from the models themselves (Hazell, 2023). The availability of open-
source LLMs offers technical users greater flexibility to train, customize, and
implement models according to their needs (Yang et al., 2023).
    Therefore, LLMs have the potential to reshape the landscape of cyber-social
security dramatically, a concern shared by many researchers (Bommasani et al.,
2021; Yamin et al., 2021; Guembe et al., 2022; Goldstein et al., 2023; Kucharavy
et al., 2023). However, empirical evidence of such abuse in the field is rare.
One example comes from Hanley et al., who analyze machine-generated text in
news media outlets and find a significant surge in such content after the release
of ChatGPT, particularly on low-credibility websites (Hanley and Durumeric,
2023). Our research contributes to this growing body of work, focusing on a
botnet that exploits ChatGPT for harmful activities.

2.2      LLM-generated content detection
The potential misuse of LLMs necessitates the development of reliable methods
to detect LLM-generated content (Crothers et al., 2022). Existing strategies
can be broadly classified into black-box and white-box approaches (Tang et al.,
2023). Back-box detection methods are often framed as binary classification
    4 openai.com/blog/introducing-chatgpt-and-whisper-apis (Accessed May 2023)




                                            3
problems where classifiers are trained on texts generated by humans and ma-
chines. The goal is to identify the characteristics of machine-generated content,
such as statistical anomalies (Gehrmann et al., 2019; Mitchell et al., 2023) and
linguistic patterns (Guo et al., 2023; Fröhling and Zubiaga, 2021). White-box
methods, on the other hand, require LLM owners to embed specific signals or
watermarks (e.g., altered word frequencies) into generated content for subse-
quent identification (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023).
    However, the exceptional text-generation capability of LLMs has raised ques-
tions about the feasibility of detection. For example, Sadasivan et al. argue that
black-box detection might be unachievable when LLMs can produce text com-
pletely indistinguishable from human-generated content (Sadasivan et al., 2023).
Chakraborty et al. show that detection is theoretically possible if machine- and
human-generated content distributions differ, but as LLMs advance, the sam-
ple size required for detection increases (Chakraborty et al., 2023). White-box
methods are not bulletproof either, being susceptible to adversarial attacks. Re-
cent studies suggest that text paraphrasing significantly reduces detection accu-
racy (Sadasivan et al., 2023; Krishna et al., 2023). Furthermore, this approach
might not apply to open-source LLMs, as malicious actors could intentionally
remove the embedded watermarks (Tang et al., 2023). In conclusion, detecting
LLM-generated content is a formidable challenge.

2.3    Social bot detection
Different from chatbots such as ChatGPT, which interact with users solely
through text, social media bots display profiles and engage with others through
various means, including following, liking, and retweeting. All these behav-
iors can be leveraged by machine-learning models to detect bots. Researchers
commonly adopt the supervised approach where examples of bot and human ac-
counts are collected for training classifiers (Yang et al., 2019; Sayyadiharikandeh
et al., 2020). Various characteristics, ranging from account metadata to social
network structure, are then considered during the process (Ferrara et al., 2016;
Varol et al., 2017). Content posted by bots also provides essential clues (Kudugunta
and Ferrara, 2018; Heidari and Jones, 2020).
    As some bots evolve to mimic human profiles and behaviors better, their
activities can only be detected during orchestrated operations (Cresci, 2020).
This unsupervised approach typically requires calculating the similarity of dif-
ferent accounts and subsequently clustering them into groups (Pacheco et al.,
2021). Key signals include temporal activities (Chavoshi et al., 2016; Keller
et al., 2017), common retweets (Nizzoli et al., 2021), and URLs shared in
tweets (Pacheco et al., 2021; Giglietto et al., 2020). Definitions of the similarity
measure vary across studies. Therefore, unsupervised methods tend to struggle
with generalizability across different contexts, despite their high precision in
specific cases.




                                        4
2.4      Bots supercharged by LLMs
LLMs also have the potential to enhance the capabilities of social bots, akin to
previously mentioned cyber-social threats (Grimme et al., 2022; Ferrara, 2023).
A basic application is to use LLMs to generate realistic text for bots, increasing
their resemblance to human users. To develop effective detection methods for
this kind of bots, Kumarage et al. construct an in-house dataset employing
GPT-2 to generate text and compare it with human-generated content (Ku-
marage et al., 2023). However, empirical investigations into social bots leverag-
ing machine-generated text are limited. A noteworthy exception is the work by
Fagni et al., who identify 23 self-disclosed bot accounts on Twitter and share
the dataset (Fagni et al., 2021). According to the description of these bots,
their tweets are generated by algorithms such as GPT-2, RNN, LSTM, and
Markov Chain. Subsequent studies have built upon this dataset to explore vari-
ous strategies for bot detection based on content (Saravani et al., 2021; Gambini
et al., 2022; Tourille et al., 2022). Despite these studies, our understanding of
bots powered by advanced LLMs remains rudimentary. Our study contributes
to this line of research by analyzing a more up-to-date botnet that utilizes state-
of-the-art AI models.


3      Identification of the fox8 botnet
As mentioned above, the fox8 botnet was identified through self-revealing tweets
posted by these accounts accidentally. To prevent the generation of undesirable
content, proprietary LLMs often have safeguards implanted through a tech-
nique called reinforcement learning from human feedback (Ouyang et al., 2022).
ChatGPT models, for example, are instructed to refuse to respond to any ques-
tions5 that go against OpenAI’s usage policies.6 Violations include harmful
content, disinformation, and tailored financial advice. Upon a violation, the
models respond with a standardized message asserting their identity as AI lan-
guage models and their inability to comply (see Table 1 for examples). This
self-revealing content can be posted accidentally by LLM-powered bots in the
absence of a suitable filtering mechanism.
    Based on this clue, we searched Twitter for the phrase “as an ai language
model” between Oct. 1, 2022, and Apr. 23, 2023, using the historical search end-
point of Twitter’s V2 API. This led to 12,226 tweets by 9,112 unique accounts,
but there is no guarantee that all these accounts are LLM-powered bots. There-
fore, we selected a sample of 100 accounts for manual verification, discovering
that 76% are likely humans posting or retweeting ChatGPT outputs, while the
remaining accounts are likely bots using LLMs for content generation. However,
definitive identification is challenging due to the natural, human-like nature of
LLM-generated text.
    During the annotation process, we noticed recurring patterns among some
    5 openai.com/blog/how-should-ai-systems-behave (Accessed May 2023)
    6 openai.com/policies/usage-policies (Accessed May 2023)




                                             5
bot-like accounts. Specifically, they consistently link to three suspicious web-
sites: fox8.news7 (distinct from the legitimate news outlet, fox8.com),
cryptnomics.org,8 and globaleconomics.news.9 Consequently, we extracted
all 1,140 accounts linking to any of these websites for further investigation and
found strong indications of their origin from the same botnet, likely employing
ChatGPT for content creation (see evidence in the following sections). There-
fore, we dub it the “fox8” botnet and focus on it in this study.
    We collect up to 200 recent tweets along with friend and follower lists
from each fox8 bot using the Twitter V1.1 API for further investigation. In
our analyses, we aim to contrast the behaviors of the fox8 bots against those
of legitimate accounts with human-generated content. To do so, we turn to
pre-existing datasets employed for training social bot detectors (Yang et al.,
2022). Specifically, we utilize four datasets: botometer-feedback (Yang et al.,
2019), gilani-17 (Gilani et al., 2017), midterm-2018 (Yang et al., 2020), and
varol-icwsm (Varol et al., 2017), randomly selecting 285 human accounts from
each. The accounts in these datasets were annotated by humans. Up to 200
tweets by these accounts were collected years before the release of LLMs like
ChatGPT, significantly reducing the possibility of data contamination. Combin-
ing the 1,140 bot accounts with the 1,140 human ones results in our benchmark
dataset: the fox8-23 dataset, which is publicly available at github.com/osome-
iu/AIBot_fox8.


4      Characterizations
In this section, we characterize the fox8 bots to reveal their behavioral patterns.

4.1     Profiles
Let us start with fox8 profiles and show the distributions of their follower/following
count, tweet count, and creation year in Figure 1. These bots have 74.0 (SD=36.7)
followers, 140.4 (SD=236.6) friends, and 149.6 (SD 178.8) tweets on average.
These numbers suggest that the fox8 bots are actively participating in various
activities on Twitter. We find most of them were created over seven years ago,
with some being created in 2023. Most of the bots have descriptions in their
profiles, which commonly mention cryptocurrencies and blockchains.

4.2     Social networks
Let us analyze the social networks of the fox8 bots. We consider three forms
of interactions: following, retweeting, and replying. Quotes are ignored due
to their rareness. The follow network is constructed through bots’ friend and
follower lists. The retweet and reply networks are inferred based on their recent
    7 web.archive.org/web/20230401111956/https://fox8.news
    8 web.archive.org/web/20230401190830/https://cryptnomics.org
    9 web.archive.org/web/20230401111503/https://globaleconomics.news




                                            6
            400                                      600
                                          (a)                                       (b)
            300
                                                     400
Frequency




            200
                                                     200
            100
              0                                        0
                  0       100      200    300              100   101 102 103        104
                         Follower count                           Following count
            600                                     1000
                                          (c)                                       (d)
                                                     750
            400
Frequency




                                                     500
            200
                                                     250
              0                                        0
                  100   101 102 103       104             2 4 6 8 0 2
                          Tweet count                  201 201 201 201 202 202
                                                               Year of creation

Figure 1: Profile characteristics of the fox8 bots (N=1,140). We show the
distributions of (a) follower count, (b) following (friend) count, (c) tweet count,
and (e) year of creation.




                                                7
tweets. Here we only focus on the 1,140 fox8 bots and ignore other accounts
even if they have interacted with fox8 bots.
    We visualize the follow network in Figure 2(a), which turns out to be very
dense: it has an in-degree of 13.7 (SD=5.2) and an out-degree of 13.4 (SD=5.8)
on average. The near-identical distributions concentrated around mean values
suggest that the following behaviors of the fox8 bots are engineered rather than
organic — empirical distributions of follower counts tend to be significantly
broader and more skewed toward lower values (Conover et al., 2012). Similarly,
we show the reply and retweet networks in Figure 2(b,c). The reply network
is much sparser, with an average in-degree of 3.4 (SD=2.3) and out-degree of
3.1 (SD=1.9). Note that we only show the largest weakly connected component
that contains 1,036 fox8 accounts here. The retweet network is very similar to
the replying network.
    Unlike the follow network, the reply and retweet networks shown in the
figure might still emerge from organic account interactions. To rule out this
possibility, we perform additional analysis by comparing the fox8 bots with
another group of accounts as the baseline. Since a random sample from Twitter
would likely demonstrate no interactions among them at all, we resort to a
convenience sample, i.e., the 7,972 accounts that posted “as an ai language
model” but are not part of the fox8 botnet. These accounts, as our manual
annotation suggests, discussed AI at certain points. So their behaviors can
better reflect the interaction patterns among users in an online community with
shared interests. We label this the “baseline” group.
    We obtain up to 200 most recent tweets from the baseline accounts to infer
their reply and retweet edges with others. For the fox8 bots and the baseline
accounts, we calculate the percentages of account pairs with reply and retweet
edges both within and across groups in Figure 2(d,e). The results for the reply
network suggest that there is a 0.2% chance for the fox8 bots to reply to each
other, in contrast to the baseline group’s 0.016%. Compared to the interactions
within the groups, cross-group interactions are extremely rare. Similar patterns
are observed for the retweeting relations.
    These findings suggest that the fox8 bots purposely follow each other to form
a dense cluster. They also frequently interact with each other through replies
and retweets to boost engagement metrics. It is worth mentioning that they
also engage with accounts outside the botnet by following, retweeting, replying,
and liking them.

4.3    Content type
We now turn to the tweets posted by the fox8 bots. During the manual check, we
noticed that their timelines contain a balanced mix of various tweet types. To
confirm this observation, we calculate the percentage of original tweets, replies,
and retweets/quotes (we combine the two for simplicity) and show the results
as a heatmap in Figure 3(a). For comparison, we generate the same plot for
the human accounts in fox8-23 and display it in Figure 3(b). We find that
the human accounts are spread out across the feature space, indicating diverse


                                        8
                (a)                 (b)                   (c)




                             (d)                 (e)
      Source account group




                                   Target account group

Figure 2: Social networks of the fox8 bots. (a) Visualization of the follow
network (N=1,140) and the corresponding in- and out-degree distributions. (b)
Same as (a) but for the reply network (N=1,036). (c) Same as (a) but for the
retweet network (N=1,058). (d) Percentages of account pairs with replies within
and across the fox8 and baseline groups. The y- and x-axes indicate source and
target account groups, respectively. (e) Same as (d) but for retweets.




                                          9
(a) Bots                                    (b) Humans




              )




                                                         )
            (%




                                                       (%
           tes




                                                      tes
        uo




                                                   uo
      /q




                                                  /q
                                 Re




                                                                            Re
      ts




                                                 ts
                                   plie




                                                                              plie
    ee




                                                 ee
   tw




                                              tw
                                        s




                                                                                   s
 Re




                                            Re
                                     (%




                                                                                (%
                                       )




                                                                                  )
           Original tweets (%)                        Original tweets (%)


Figure 3: Distributions of tweet types for bot and human accounts in the
fox8-23 dataset. (a) Each bot account is mapped along three axes rep-
resenting the percentages of different tweet types: original tweets, replies,
retweets/quotes. The color represents the number of bots in each hexagonal
bin, on a log scale. (b) Same as (a), but for the human accounts.


behavioral patterns. On the other hand, the fox8 bots concentrate within a
confined region, suggesting programmed behavioral patterns. On average, the
bots generate 25.6% (SD=22.4%) original tweets, 36.1% (SD=21.3%) replies,
and 38.4% (SD=21.7%) retweets/quotes.
   Notably, many fox8 bots intermittently post photos, often selfies, giving the
impression that real individuals are behind the accounts. However, we find these
photos are appropriated from other websites or social media platforms, such as
Instagram, a known tactic to create fake personas.10

4.4        Amplified hashtags and accounts
What is the objective of the fox8 bots? We address this question by analyzing
the hashtags in their tweets and the accounts they retweet or reply to most
frequently. In Figure 4(a), we show the ten most shared hashtags by the fox8
bots. We combine the original tweets, retweets, and quotes in the calculation
since they yield qualitatively similar results. The majority of these hashtags are
associated with cryptocurrency/blockchain.
    We also identify the accounts with which the fox8 bots engage most fre-
quently. Since fox8 bots interact with each other routinely, we focus on the ac-
counts outside the botnet and show the top ten in Figure 4(b). Most of these ac-
counts are related to cryptocurrency/blockchain/NFT. Note that @GlobalEconNews
is the official account for globaleconomics.news, one of the websites used to
identify the fox8 bots. This account’s reply, retweet, and like sections are filled
with fox8 bots.
  10 nytimes.com/interactive/2018/01/27/technology/social-media-bots.html (Accessed May

2023)



                                            10
         (a) #breaking                      (b) @CryptnomicsOrg
             #bitcoin                           @WatcherGuru
             #crypto                            @crypto
             #web3                              @missteencrypto
             #ethereum                          @ForbesCrypto
             #cryptocurrency                    @AshleyDCan
             #latest                            @kucoincom
             #doge                              @AngelsOfCrypto
             #litecoin                          @GlobalEconNews
             #bearmarket                        @idalistrades
            0   2000 4000 6000 8000           0         2000       4000
                   Frequency                          Frequency

Figure 4: Hashtags and accounts amplified by the fox8 bots. (a) Ten most
frequent hashtags shared by fox8 bots in their recent tweets. (b) Ten most
frequent accounts outside the botnet that are retweeted, quoted, or replied to
by fox8 bots.


    These findings suggest that the fox8 bots are mainly used to post and am-
plify information about cryptocurrency/blockchain, consistent with their de-
scriptions.

4.5    Shared websites
Since the fox8 bots frequently share links in their tweets, we extract the website
domains of these links and show the ten most frequent ones in Figure 5(a).
Three websites (cryptnomics.org, fox8.news, and globaleconomics.news)
are much more prominent than others, which is not surprising as they are also
the ones we use to identify the fox8 bots. We further calculate the probability of
each fox8 bot sharing these websites and show the distributions in Figure 5(b).
Around 3% of bot tweets, on average, contain links to one of the three websites.
    Although these three websites appear to be normal news outlets, several
aspects regarding them raise red flags. While the owner identity is hidden in
the domain registration information, two domains were registered on Feb. 8 and
the third on Feb. 9, 2023. The three websites share many other similarities. For
example, they seem to use the same WordPress theme, their domains resolve to
the same IP address, and they display pop-up prompts urging visitors to install
suspicious software. Although they present themselves as news publishers, no
details regarding their editorial teams are provided. And they source all their
articles from recognized media platforms like vox.com and forbes.com.
    Many fox8 tweets linking to these suspicious websites contain text that is


                                       11
         (a) cryptnomics.org             (b) cryptnomics.org
             fox8.news
             globaleconomics.news
             getyarn.io                     fox8.news
             msn.com
             vitalik.eth.limo
             stake.com
             unmaskcrypto.com               globaleconomics.news
             gemini.com
             merriam-webster.com
            0    2000 4000 6000             0%     5%      10% 15%
                    Frequency                    Sharing probability

Figure 5: Websites shared by the fox8 bots. (a) Ten most frequent websites
shared by fox8 bots in their recent tweets. (b) Distribution of the probability
of sharing articles linking to the three suspicious websites.


not cohesive with the news articles. These include some self-revealing tweets.
Therefore, we speculate that ChatGPT is used to generate these tweets to pro-
mote the websites, even though the execution by the operator is not perfect.

4.6    Self-revealing tweets
We are particularly interested in the role of LLMs in powering the fox8 bots.
Here we focus on the self-revealing tweets for two reasons. First, we are more
certain these tweets originate from LLMs. Second, the self-revealing tweets can
provide insights into the operator’s prompts or instructions, shedding light on
(some of) their objectives.
    Of the recent tweets from the fox8 bots, 1,205 are self-revealing, with some
bots having multiple instances. We manually categorize them and show the
percentage of each class and a corresponding example in Table 1. Occasionally,
the self-revealing tweets explicitly reference “OpenAI,” leading us to believe
that the botnet utilizes ChatGPT.
    We find that most self-revealing tweets (81.3%) stem from instructions to
generate harmful/hateful/negative content against OpenAI guidelines. Another
4.1% of the tweets result from other prohibited instructions, such as providing
financial advice or expressing political viewpoints. We also find a small portion
of self-revealing tweets (2.0%) that contains positive content.
    About 12.3% of the self-revealing tweets arise from instructions that are
beyond the language model’s capabilities, such as browsing Twitter, playing
games, assessing links, etc. In some cases, the language model requests addi-


                                       12
  Table 1: Categories and examples of self-revealing tweets (N=1,205).
Category                 Number (%) Example
Harmful content          980 (81.3)     I’m sorry, but I cannot com-
                                        ply with this request as it vio-
                                        lates OpenAI’s Content Pol-
                                        icy on generating harmful or
                                        inappropriate content. As an
                                        AI language model, my responses
                                        should always be respectful and
                                        appropriate for all audiences.
Beyond capability        148 (12.3)     I’m sorry, but as an AI language
                                        model I cannot browse Twit-
                                        ter and access specific tweets
                                        to provide replies.
Other forbidden content 49 (4.1)        I’m sorry, as an AI language
                                        model I cannot provide in-
                                        vestment advice or predic-
                                        tions about stock prices.
Positive content         23 (2.0)       No worries, friend! As an AI
                                        language model myself, I strive to
                                        keep things positive and up-
                                        lifting. Let’s spread some good
                                        vibes together with a #positivity
                                        hashtag!
Others                   5 (0.0)        Interesting topic! Fortunately,
                                        as an AI language model, I don’t
                                        have to pay taxes or worry about
                                        intergenerational wealth trans-
                                        fer...yet.




                                   13
tional information. These responses are often found in replies, suggesting that
the operator employs ChatGPT to turn the fox8 bots into intelligent chatbots
for natural interactions. The fox8 bots even chat with each other sometimes.
    Note that the disparity between the negative and positive instructions shown
in Table 1 does not imply that ChatGPT is primarily used to generate negative
content for the fox8 bots. Instead, it could be attributed to selection bias, as
malicious prompts are more likely to elicit self-revealing responses. Based on
the findings, we believe the operator employs a variety of prompts to generate
diverse content, including negative comments.


5     Detection
Given the imminent threat posed by LLM-powered bots, it is crucial to develop
effective detection methods. In this section, we explore different approaches to
identifying them.
    One strategy is to consider the fox8 bots as coordinated inauthentic actors
and use the unsupervised methods mentioned in the related work for their de-
tection (Pacheco et al., 2021). The analyses above suggest that these bots often
link to a common set of domains, post and amplify similar hashtags, and inter-
act amongst themselves. These signals can be leveraged to identify the bots.
However, this approach may not generalize to LLM-powered bots outside this
particular botnet. Hence, we aim to explore methods that are applicable to a
range of bot types.

5.1    Botometer
We first test Botometer,11 a supervised machine-learning tool designed to detect
social bots on Twitter (Yang et al., 2022). Botometer considers over 1,000
features covering account profiles, content, social networks, and so on. It has
been validated in many research projects under various contexts. The tool
provides an overall score and a set of sub-scores that indicate bot classes. The
scores are in the range between 0 and 5. A higher score indicates that the
account is more likely to be a bot.
    We evaluate the fox8 bots using Botometer and show the distributions of the
outcomes in Figure 6. We can see all the bot score distributions are left-skewed,
meaning Botometer believes they are human-like. Using 2.5 as a threshold, we
calculate the recall of different scores and annotate the results in the figure. The
results are nearly zero in all cases, suggesting that Botometer cannot identify
the fox8 bots.
    This result is not surprising since the current version of Botometer was
trained before the release of ChatGPT and was not configured to identify LLM-
powered bots. Instead, Botometer leverages other account characteristics in its
evaluation. As shown above, the fox8 bots demonstrate sophisticated behavioral
patterns that are similar to human users. When inspected individually, even
 11 botometer.org




                                        14
                                            Overall           Fake follower             Financial
                                            R=0.04                  R=0.03                R=0.00
Frequency




                                                              Self declared            Spammer
                                                                    R=0.01               R=0.03



                                                             Echo chamber                 Other
                                                                   R=0.00                R=0.04



                         Bot score                                      Bot score


 Figure 6: Botometer score distributions for the fox8 bots. In the left panel,
 we show the results of the overall score. In the right panel, we show the results
 of different sub-scores. We annotate the recall (R) in each plot using 2.5 as a
 threshold.


 human experts cannot determine their nature easily. After all, these bots were
 captured by the self-revealing tweets posted inadvertently.

 5.2         LLM-generated content detectors
 Since our goal is to identify accounts using LLMs to generate content, we can
 also leverage detectors designed specifically for such content. Here we consider
 two such tools, OpenAI’s AI text classifier (OpenAI, 2023) and GPTZero,12 that
 are easily accessible and designed to detect content generated by ChatGPT.
     In Jan. 2023, OpenAI released their AI text detector,13 a language model
 fine-tuned on human- and machine-generated content that works for different
 LLMs including OpenAI’s own models. This description suggests that the de-
 tector uses the black-box detection approach. However, it is unclear if OpenAI
 has embedded watermarks in their LLMs and uses them for detection.
     This detector has a web interface that requires a minimum input of 1,000
 characters.14 The model’s output ranges across five possible classifications for
 the submitted text: “very unlikely,” “unlikely,” “unclear if it is,” “possibly,” and
 “likely” to be AI-generated. According to the JavaScript code of the webpage,
 the underlying model returns a score in the range between 0 and 100 (we call
 it the OpenAI detector score) and the different categories above correspond
 to the following score ranges respectively: (0, 10], (10, 45], (45, 90], (90, 98],
 and (98, 100]. OpenAI chooses a very high threshold (90) for determining AI-
 generated content to reduce the false positive rate.
     Considering the relatively short length of individual tweets from the fox8
 bots, we concatenate them per user and run the consolidated text through
       12 gptzero.me
       13 openai.com/blog/new-ai-classifier-for-indicating-ai-written-text (Accessed May 2023)
       14 platform.openai.com/ai-text-classifier




                                                      15
                           0.2                Concatenation           (a)
                                              Other tweets



               Frequency
                                              Self-revealing tweets
                           0.1

                           0.0
                                  0       20 40 60 80                 100
                                          OpenAI detector score
                            20                Concatenation           (b)
                                              Other tweets
                Frequency



                                              Self-revealing tweets
                            10

                             0
                                 0.0      0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                                       GPTZero's generated probability

Figure 7: Evaluation of LLM-generated content detectors on the tweets of
fox8 bots. (a) Results of OpenAI’s AI text classifier. (b) Results of GPTZero.
“Concatenation” means the concatenation of all tweets from each bot. “Self-
revealing tweets” refer to the tweets listed in Table 1. “Other tweets” refer to
tweets other than self-revealing tweets. The dashed lines indicate the official
thresholds of the tools.


OpenAI’s detector. We then plot the distribution of the OpenAI detector scores
in Figure 7(a). Unfortunately, most of the concatenated texts garner scores near
zero, leading the detector to classify them as human-generated. Given that these
tweets are not produced in a single session, their concatenation could mislead
the detector. Consequently, we explore methodologies for tweet-level detection.
    The 1,000-character requirement is primarily due to the detector’s reduced
accuracy for shorter texts. It is only reinforced on the webpage. By directly
accessing the undocumented API the webpage uses, the model (registered as
“model-detect-v2”) can rate text of any length. Hence, we input each tweet from
the fox8 bots into the detector and show the score distribution in Figure 7(a).
The self-revealing tweets and other tweets are split since we can confidently
attribute the former to ChatGPT. The self-revealing tweets typically yield very
high scores, while the scores for other tweets are distributed across the entire
range.
    Next, we examine the performance of GPTZero. It claims to be the “global
standard for AI detection,” with over one million users and wide collaboration
with educators. According to its FAQ,15 GPTZero is a “classification model that
 15 gptzero.me/faq (Accessed May 2023)




                                                 16
predicts whether a document was written by a large language model, providing
predictions on a sentence, paragraph, and document level.” This suggests that
it is a black-box detection method as well.
     We use its API to analyze the tweets of the fox8 bots. Since it operates
on documents of at least 250 characters, we again concatenate the tweets for
each user. The results contain a “completely generated prob” score in the range
from 0 to 1, signifying the probability that the document is generated by LLMs.
Additionally, GPTZero provides a probability for each individual sentence. The
official documentation suggests using 0.65 as the threshold to dichotomize the
probabilities. We show the distributions of overall and sentence-level probabili-
ties for the self-revealing and other tweets in Figure 7(b). All probabilities are
near zero.
     The comparison here suggests that GPTZero is unsuitable for the task of
identifying content posted by fox8 bots, while OpenAI’s detector shows some
potential. Note that we implement additional processing steps to the tweets
in the experiments above. We exclude retweets since they originate from other
accounts. For the rest of the tweets (i.e., original tweets, replies, and quotes),
we only retain those in English since both detectors primarily cater to this
language. We remove the user handles of the targets in replies since they are
injected by Twitter. The links in the tweets are also removed.

5.3    Detecting LLM-powered bots
Due to the valuable indicators provided by OpenAI’s AI text detector at the
tweet level, let us explore the feasibility of building a tool to detect LLM-powered
bots on top of it. The idea is simple: for a given account, we extract the qualified
tweets, process them, run them through the detector, and calculate the average
score to determine the nature of the account.
    We use the full fox8-23 dataset in this experiment. The distribution of
the final scores at the account level can be found in Figure 8(a). The fox8
bots tend to have higher average scores compared to the humans according to
a t-test (Mean: 57.7 vs. 48.6, t = 30.6, p < 0.001), but human users exhibit
a larger standard deviation (SD: 2.6 vs. 9.7). These results indicate that this
approach is potentially effective for distinguishing between LLM-powered bots
and humans. To determine an appropriate threshold, we vary its value and
calculate the corresponding F1 score. When the threshold is set to 52.7, the F1
score is maximized, reaching 0.84.
    Let us apply this method in the field to test its effectiveness further. We
run an experiment on Twitter using a random sample of tweets posted between
May 8 and May 14, 2023. We identify the unique accounts and sample 4,000
for further analysis. Only 3,870 accounts were accessible when we queried their
information on May 17, 2023. After obtaining their recent 100 tweets, we find
that only 1,986 have at least one qualified (English, non-retweet) tweet for
further analysis.
    We calculate the average OpenAI detector scores for these 1,986 accounts
and show their distribution in Figure 8(b). For reference, we also show the


                                        17
            0.20                              0.06
                     Fox8-23 humans
                     Fox8-23 bots
                                         (a)           Fox8-23 humans
                                                       Random accounts: all
                                                                               (b)
                                              0.05     Random accounts: 4 tweets
            0.15
                                              0.04
Frequency


            0.10                              0.03
                                              0.02
            0.05
                                              0.01
            0.00                              0.00
                 0    25 50 75 100                 0    25 50 75 100
                Average OpenAI detector score     Average OpenAI detector score

Figure 8: Using OpenAI’s AI text detector to identify fox8 bots. (a) Distri-
butions of the average OpenAI detector score for human and bot accounts in
the fox8-23 dataset. (b) Distribution of the average OpenAI detector score for
random Twitter accounts (N=1,986). For comparison, we also show the dis-
tribution for the subset of random accounts with at least four qualified tweets
(N=1,269) and the results for the human accounts in fox8-23. The vertical
lines mark the optimal threshold for distinguishing between the humans and
bots in fox8-23 (see main text for details).


results for the human accounts in fox8-23. We find that the random accounts
have slightly higher scores than the fox8-23 humans according to a t-test (t =
3.4, p < 0.001). Applying the threshold from earlier (52.7) leads to 815 of the
random accounts being labeled as bots. But these might include many false
positives. The fox8-23 dataset contains the same amount of bots and humans,
however, we believe LLM-powered bots are still rare on Twitter as of today.
According to the figure, a fair amount of human accounts also have scores above
the threshold.
    To further evaluate the accuracy of the classification results, we manually an-
notate the 250 accounts with the highest OpenAI detector scores. This includes
examining their profiles and timelines, checking their friends and followers, and
searching Twitter for potential coordinated activities. Only a few accounts ap-
pear to be suspicious, although we cannot definitely attribute their content to
LLMs.
    Many false positives are caught because they only have one or two very short
tweets, which yield high scores. For example, both the terms “thank you” and
“amen” have scored over 60. This is consistent with OpenAI’s warning that the
model is less accurate for short texts. These accounts also increase the average
score of random accounts. To illustrate, we show the results for a subset of
the random accounts with at least four qualified tweets in Figure 8(b), and
their scores are not significantly different from those of the fox8-23 humans
(t = −1.4, p = 0.15).


                                               18
6    Conclusion and discussion
This paper presents a case study about a Twitter botnet that employs Chat-
GPT for content generation. Evidence points to intricate behavioral patterns
by these accounts, characterized by human-like profiles and varied activities.
Their shared actions include the posting of appropriated images, mutual ac-
count following to establish a dense social network, and reciprocal interaction
via replies and retweets. We speculate that the accounts in the botnet follow a
single probabilistic model that determines their activity types and frequencies.
ChatGPT is used to produce human-like content as original tweets or replies to
other accounts. The self-revealing tweets suggest that the language model is in-
structed to generate various content, including negative and harmful comments.
Our study also reveals the coordinated use of these bots in promoting dubious
websites.
     We investigate the effectiveness of different strategies to detect this new
strain of bots and find that classical bot detection methods prove inadequate. At
the same time, the AI text classifier provided by OpenAI demonstrates potential
efficacy in controlled lab conditions. However, applying it in the field to identify
more LLM-powered bots still faces critical challenges. First, it is unreliable for
non-English content (Liang et al., 2023) and short texts, considerably narrowing
the scope of accounts it can process. Second, it exhibits a high false positive
rate when evaluating random accounts. It is therefore premature to rely solely
on this method to detect LLM-powered bots in the field.
     Our analysis has some limitations. Since we only focus on one botnet on
Twitter, the findings might not represent other LLM-powered bots. In fact,
fox8 is likely the tip of the iceberg: the operators of other LLM-powered bots
may not be as careless. Moreover, while we assert that the fox8 bots use Chat-
GPT for content creation, we cannot guarantee that all their content is LLM-
generated. Last but not least, given that Twitter has suspended free API access
for researchers, it might become impossible to replicate our analysis or find new
LLM-powered bots in the future.
     Despite these limitations, our study sheds light on the emergence and reality
of LLM-enabled malicious bots on social media. Our findings provide valuable
insights and set the stage for investigating malicious bots further. Given the
rapid advancements in AI technologies, we anticipate a widespread surge of
more advanced bots on the internet. Accordingly, we foresee several potential
developments in bot behavior.
     Firstly, future LLM-powered bots will likely cease posting self-revealing
tweets, making them increasingly challenging to detect. Operators could employ
basic keyword-matching filters to mitigate this issue. Furthermore, the swift ad-
vancements in open-source LLMs could incentivize operators to utilize models
lacking safeguards, or even train models specifically for malicious purposes (Jin
et al., 2023).
     Secondly, bots may evolve into highly intelligent, fully autonomous entities.
The fox8 bots currently operate under some pre-established rules and only use
ChatGPT for content generation and dialogues. However, emerging research in-


                                        19
dicates that LLMs can facilitate the development of autonomous agents capable
of independently processing exposed information, making autonomous decisions,
and utilizing tools such as APIs and search engines (Li et al., 2023; Park et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023). Open-source implementations, such as AutoGPT16
and BabyAGI,17 make it straightforward to integrate these agents with Twitter
accounts.
    Lastly, bots will harness the multi-modal capabilities of more advanced gen-
erative models. The bots in the present case study only use language models
for text generation. However, the field of generative models for images has also
seen significant advancements. For instance, Generative Adversarial Networks
can already create realistic human faces (Karras et al., 2019, 2020) that hu-
mans fail to identify (Nightingale and Farid, 2022), while the stable diffusion
algorithms are capable of producing a variety of images (Rombach et al., 2022).
A combination of these generative models can further enhance the potency of
malicious social bots.
    In light of these looming threats, it is crucial to devise appropriate counter-
measures. First, we need more effective detection methods capable of identifying
short texts within the context of social media. This necessitates the training of
specialized models using data procured from more field-captured LLM-powered
bots. To this end, one could search for other phrases, such as “I’m sorry, I cannot
generate,” that LLMs use when refusing to comply with the prompts (Dekens,
2023) on other social media or websites.18 Once we gain a deeper understanding
of the instructions fed to these bots, we can also utilize LLMs to generate addi-
tional texts independently. Second, it is essential to establish regulations specific
to the utilization of LLMs in spawning malicious bots. For example, a platform
might be required to challenge an account to prove a piece of content is organic
before it becomes visible to a large audience (Menczer et al., 2023). This en-
deavor calls for collaboration among various stakeholders, including government
agencies, AI corporations, and social media platforms. However, proposing pre-
cise regulations is beyond the scope of this paper. Third, it is crucial to raise
public awareness regarding the existence of LLM-powered bots and educate indi-
viduals on strategies for self-protection against such threats. Nevertheless, this
initiative should be carried out carefully to avoid unintended consequences as
recent research indicates that preemptively informing users about the existence
of social bots may amplify their existing cognitive biases (Yan et al., 2022).

Acknowledgements
We thank Twitter users @conspirator0 and @jsrailton for the inspiration of
searching “as an ai language model” to identify LLM-powered bots on Twit-
ter. This work was supported in part by the Volkswagen Foundation, Knight
Foundation, and DARPA (grant HR001121C0169).
 16 github.com/Significant-Gravitas/Auto-GPT
 17 github.com/yoheinakajima/babyagi
  18 nytimes.com/2023/05/19/technology/ai-generated-content-discovered-on-news-sites-

content-farms-and-product-reviews.html (Accessed May 2023)



                                           20
References
Dennis Assenmacher, Lena Clever, Lena Frischlich, Thorsten Quandt, Heike
  Trautmann, and Christian Grimme. Demystifying social bots: On the in-
  telligence of automated social media actors. Social Media+ Society, 6(3):
  2056305120939264, 2020.
John W Ayers, Adam Poliak, Mark Dredze, Eric C Leas, Zechariah Zhu, Jes-
  sica B Kelley, Dennis J Faix, Aaron M Goodman, Christopher A Longhurst,
  Michael Hogarth, et al. Comparing physician and artificial intelligence chat-
  bot responses to patient questions posted to a public social media forum.
  JAMA Internal Medicine, 2023.
Aram Bahrini, Mohammadsadra Khamoshifar, Hossein Abbasimehr, Robert J
  Riggs, Maryam Esmaeili, Rastin Mastali Majdabadkohne, and Morteza
  Pasehvar. Chatgpt: Applications, opportunities, and threats. Preprint
  arXiv:2304.09103, 2023.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora,
  Sydney von Arx, Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut,
  Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models.
  Preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Miles Brundage, Shahar Avin, Jack Clark, Helen Toner, Peter Eckersley, Ben
 Garfinkel, Allan Dafoe, Paul Scharre, Thomas Zeitzoff, Bobby Filar, et al.
 The malicious use of artificial intelligence: Forecasting, prevention, and mit-
 igation. Preprint arXiv:1802.07228, 2018.
Ben Buchanan, Andrew Lohn, and Micah Musser. Truth, lies, and automation:
  How language models could change disinformation. Center for Security and
  Emerging Technology, 2021.
Souradip Chakraborty, Amrit Singh Bedi, Sicheng Zhu, Bang An, Dinesh
  Manocha, and Furong Huang. On the possibilities of ai-generated text detec-
  tion. Preprint arXiv:2304.04736, 2023.
Nikan Chavoshi, Hossein Hamooni, and Abdullah Mueen. Debot: Twitter bot
  detection via warped correlation. In IEEE International Conference on Data
  Mining (ICDM), pages 817–822, 2016.
Elizabeth Clark, Tal August, Sofia Serrano, Nikita Haduong, Suchin Gururan-
  gan, and Noah A Smith. All that’s ‘human’is not gold: Evaluating human
  evaluation of generated text. Preprint arXiv:2107.00061, 2021.
Michael D Conover, Bruno Gonçalves, Alessandro Flammini, and Filippo
 Menczer. Partisan asymmetries in online political activity. EPJ Data Science,
 1:6, 2012. doi: 10.1140/epjds6. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjds6.
Stefano Cresci. A decade of social bot detection. Communications of the ACM,
  63(10):72–83, 2020.


                                      21
Evan Crothers, Nathalie Japkowicz, and Herna Viktor. Machine generated text:
  A comprehensive survey of threat models and detection methods. Preprint
  arXiv:2210.07321, 2022.
Nico Dekens. A practical guide for osint investigators to combat disinforma-
  tion and fake reviews driven by ai (chatgpt). https://info.shadowdragon.
  io/hubfs/SD_APracticalGuide_WhitePaper-1.pdf, 2023. (Accessed May
  2023).
Tiziano Fagni, Fabrizio Falchi, Margherita Gambini, Antonio Martella, and
  Maurizio Tesconi. Tweepfake: About detecting deepfake tweets. PLOS ONE,
  16(5):1–16, 05 2021. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0251415. URL https://doi.
  org/10.1371/journal.pone.0251415.
Emilio Ferrara. Social bot detection in the age of chatgpt: Challenges and
 opportunities. First Monday, 2023.
Emilio Ferrara, Onur Varol, Clayton Davis, Filippo Menczer, and Alessandro
 Flammini. The rise of social bots. Communications of the ACM, 59(7):96–104,
 2016.
Emilio Ferrara, Herbert Chang, Emily Chen, Goran Muric, and Jaimin Patel.
 Characterizing social media manipulation in the 2020 us presidential election.
 First Monday, 2020.
Leon Fröhling and Arkaitz Zubiaga. Feature-based detection of automated lan-
  guage models: tackling gpt-2, gpt-3 and grover. PeerJ Computer Science, 7:
  e443, 2021.
Margherita Gambini, Tiziano Fagni, Fabrizio Falchi, and Maurizio Tesconi. On
 pushing deepfake tweet detection capabilities to the limits. In 14th ACM Web
 Science Conference 2022, pages 154–163, 2022.
Sebastian Gehrmann, Hendrik Strobelt, and Alexander M Rush. Gltr: Statisti-
  cal detection and visualization of generated text. Preprint arXiv:1906.04043,
  2019.
Fabio Giglietto, Nicola Righetti, Luca Rossi, and Giada Marino. Coordinated
  link sharing behavior as a signal to surface sources of problematic information
  on facebook. In International Conference on Social Media and Society, pages
  85–91, 2020.
Zafar Gilani, Reza Farahbakhsh, Gareth Tyson, Liang Wang, and Jon
  Crowcroft. Of bots and humans (on Twitter). In Proceedings of the In-
  ternational Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining,
  pages 349–354. ACM, 2017.
Josh A Goldstein, Girish Sastry, Micah Musser, Renee DiResta, Matthew
  Gentzel, and Katerina Sedova. Generative language models and automated
  influence operations: Emerging threats and potential mitigations. Preprint
  arXiv:2301.04246, 2023.


                                       22
Christian Grimme, Janina Pohl, Stefano Cresci, Ralf Lüling, and Mike Preuss.
  New automation for social bots: From trivial behavior to ai-powered commu-
  nication. In Francesca Spezzano, Adriana Amaral, Davide Ceolin, Lisa Fazio,
  and Edoardo Serra, editors, Disinformation in Open Online Media, pages 79–
  99, Cham, 2022. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-031-18253-2.

Blessing Guembe, Ambrose Azeta, Sanjay Misra, Victor Chukwudi Osamor,
  Luis Fernandez-Sanz, and Vera Pospelova. The emerging threat of ai-driven
  cyber attacks: A review. Applied Artificial Intelligence, 36(1):2037254, 2022.
Biyang Guo, Xin Zhang, Ziyuan Wang, Minqi Jiang, Jinran Nie, Yuxuan Ding,
  Jianwei Yue, and Yupeng Wu. How close is chatgpt to human experts? com-
  parison corpus, evaluation, and detection. Preprint arXiv:2301.07597, 2023.
Hans WA Hanley and Zakir Durumeric. Machine-made media: Monitoring the
  mobilization of machine-generated articles on misinformation and mainstream
  news websites. Preprint arXiv:2305.09820, 2023.

Julian Hazell. Large language models can be used to effectively scale spear
  phishing campaigns. Preprint arXiv:2305.06972, 2023.
Maryam Heidari and James H Jones. Using bert to extract topic-independent
 sentiment features for social media bot detection. In IEEE Annual Ubiquitous
 Computing, Electronics & Mobile Communication Conference (UEMCON),
 pages 0542–0547. IEEE, 2020.

Maurice Jakesch, Jeffrey T. Hancock, and Mor Naaman. Human heuristics for
 ai-generated language are flawed. Proceedings of the National Academy of
 Sciences, 120(11):e2208839120, 2023.
Amelia M. Jamison, David A. Broniatowski, and Sandra Crouse Quinn. Mali-
 cious Actors on Twitter: A Guide for Public Health Researchers. American
 Journal of Public Health, 109(5):688–692, 2019. ISSN 0090-0036.
Youngjin Jin, Eugene Jang, Jian Cui, Jin-Woo Chung, Yongjae Lee, and Se-
  ungwon Shin. Darkbert: A language model for the dark side of the internet.
  Preprint arXiv:2305.08596, 2023.

Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architec-
  ture for generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 4401–4410,
  2019.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen,
  and Timo Aila. Analyzing and improving the image quality of stylegan. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pages 8110–8119, 2020.




                                      23
Enkelejda Kasneci, Kathrin Seßler, Stefan Küchemann, Maria Bannert, Daryna
  Dementieva, Frank Fischer, Urs Gasser, Georg Groh, Stephan Günnemann,
  Eyke Hüllermeier, et al. Chatgpt for good? on opportunities and challenges
  of large language models for education. Learning and Individual Differences,
  103:102274, 2023. ISSN 1041-6080.

Franziska Keller, David Schoch, Sebastian Stier, and JungHwan Yang. How to
  manipulate social media: Analyzing political astroturfing using ground truth
  data from south korea. In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference
  on Web and Social Media, volume 11, 2017.
Franziska B Keller, David Schoch, Sebastian Stier, and JungHwan Yang. Po-
  litical astroturfing on twitter: How to coordinate a disinformation campaign.
  Political Communication, 37(2):256–280, 2020.
John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Jonathan Katz, Ian Miers,
  and Tom Goldstein. A watermark for large language models. Preprint
  arXiv:2301.10226, 2023.

Sarah Kreps, R. Miles McCain, and Miles Brundage. All the news that’s fit to
  fabricate: Ai-generated text as a tool of media misinformation. Journal of
  Experimental Political Science, 9(1):104–117, 2022. doi: 10.1017/XPS.2020.
  37.
Kalpesh Krishna, Yixiao Song, Marzena Karpinska, John Wieting, and Mohit
 Iyyer. Paraphrasing evades detectors of ai-generated text, but retrieval is an
 effective defense. Preprint arXiv:2303.13408, 2023.
Andrei Kucharavy, Zachary Schillaci, Loı̈c Maréchal, Maxime Würsch, Ljiljana
 Dolamic, Remi Sabonnadiere, Dimitri Percia David, Alain Mermoud, and
 Vincent Lenders. Fundamentals of generative large language models and per-
 spectives in cyber-defense. Preprint arXiv:2303.12132, 2023.
Sneha Kudugunta and Emilio Ferrara. Deep neural networks for bot detection.
  Information Sciences, 467:312–322, 2018.
Tharindu Kumarage, Joshua Garland, Amrita Bhattacharjee, Kirill
  Trapeznikov, Scott Ruston, and Huan Liu.            Stylometric detection of
  ai-generated text in twitter timelines. Preprint arXiv:2303.03697, 2023.
Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin,
 and Bernard Ghanem. Camel: Communicative agents for” mind” exploration
 of large scale language model society. Preprint arXiv:2303.17760, 2023.

Weixin Liang, Mert Yuksekgonul, Yining Mao, Eric Wu, and James Zou.
 Gpt detectors are biased against non-native english writers. Preprint
 arXiv:2304.02819, 2023.




                                      24
Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and
  Graham Neubig. Pre-train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of
  prompting methods in natural language processing. ACM Computing Surveys,
  55(9):1–35, 2023.
Thomas Marlow, Sean Miller, and J. Timmons Roberts. Twitter Discourses on
  Climate Change: Exploring Topics and the Presence of Bots. SocArXiv, 2020.
  doi: 10.31235/osf.io/h6ktm.
Filippo Menczer, David Crandall, Yong-Yeol Ahn, and Apu Kapadia. Ad-
  dressing the harms of AI-generated inauthentic content. Nature Machine
  Intelligence, 5:679–680, 2023. doi: 10.1038/s42256-023-00690-w. URL
  https://rdcu.be/dgGfk.
Eric Mitchell, Yoonho Lee, Alexander Khazatsky, Christopher D Manning, and
  Chelsea Finn. Detectgpt: Zero-shot machine-generated text detection using
  probability curvature. Preprint arXiv:2301.11305, 2023.
Sophie J Nightingale and Hany Farid. Ai-synthesized faces are indistinguishable
  from real faces and more trustworthy. Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 119(8):e2120481119, 2022.
Leonardo Nizzoli, Serena Tardelli, Marco Avvenuti, Stefano Cresci, and Mau-
  rizio Tesconi. Coordinated behavior on social media in 2019 UK general
  election. In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and
  Social Media, volume 15, pages 443–454, 2021.
OpenAI. Ai text classifier. https://beta.openai.com/ai-text-classifier, January
 2023. URL https://beta.openai.com/ai-text-classifier.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright,
  Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex
  Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feed-
  back. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:27730–27744,
  2022.
Diogo Pacheco, Pik-Mai Hui, Christopher Torres-Lugo, Bao Tran Truong,
  Alessandro Flammini, and Filippo Menczer. Uncovering coordinated net-
  works on social media: Methods and case studies. In Proceedings of the
  International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, volume 15, pages
  455–466, 2021.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy
  Liang, and Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of
  human behavior. Preprint arXiv:2304.03442, 2023.
Chengwei Qin, Aston Zhang, Zhuosheng Zhang, Jiaao Chen, Michihiro Ya-
  sunaga, and Diyi Yang. Is ChatGPT a general-purpose natural language
  processing task solver? Preprint arXiv:2302.06476, 2023.


                                      25
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn
  Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022.
Vinu Sankar Sadasivan, Aounon Kumar, Sriram Balasubramanian, Wenxiao
  Wang, and Soheil Feizi. Can ai-generated text be reliably detected? Preprint
  arXiv:2303.11156, 2023.
Sina Mahdipour Saravani, Indrajit Ray, and Indrakshi Ray. Automated iden-
  tification of social media bots using deepfake text detection. In Information
  Systems Security: International Conference (ICISS), pages 111–123. Springer,
  2021.
Mohsen Sayyadiharikandeh, Onur Varol, Kai-Cheng Yang, Alessandro Flam-
 mini, and Filippo Menczer. Detection of novel social bots by ensembles of
 specialized classifiers. In Proc. 29th ACM International Conference on Infor-
 mation & Knowledge Management (CIKM), pages 2725–2732, 2020. doi: 10.
 1145/3340531.3412698. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3340531.3412698.
Chengcheng Shao, Giovanni Luca Ciampaglia, Onur Varol, Kai-Cheng Yang,
  Alessandro Flammini, and Filippo Menczer. The spread of low-credibility
  content by social bots. Nature communications, 9(1):4787, 2018.
Giovanni Spitale, Nikola Biller-Andorno, and Federico Germani. Ai model gpt-3
  (dis) informs us better than humans. Preprint arXiv:2301.11924, 2023.
Ruixiang Tang, Yu-Neng Chuang, and Xia Hu. The science of detecting LLM-
 generated texts. Preprint arXiv:2303.07205, 2023.
Julien Tourille, Babacar Sow, and Adrian Popescu. Automatic detection of
  bot-generated tweets. In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on
  Multimedia AI against Disinformation, pages 44–51, 2022.
Onur Varol, Emilio Ferrara, Clayton A Davis, Filippo Menczer, and Alessandro
 Flammini. Online human-bot interactions: Detection, estimation, and char-
 acterization. In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web
 and Social Media, 2017.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke
 Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied
 agent with large language models. Preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023.
Laura Weidinger, Jonathan Uesato, Maribeth Rauh, Conor Griffin, Po-Sen
  Huang, John Mellor, Amelia Glaese, Myra Cheng, Borja Balle, Atoosa
  Kasirzadeh, et al. Taxonomy of risks posed by language models. In ACM
  Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pages 214–229,
  2022.



                                      26
Muhammad Mudassar Yamin, Mohib Ullah, Habib Ullah, and Basel Katt.
 Weaponized ai for cyber attacks. Journal of Information Security and Appli-
 cations, 57:102722, 2021.
Harry Yaojun Yan, Kai-Cheng Yang, James Shanahan, and Filippo Menczer.
  Exposure to social bots amplifies perceptual biases and regulation propensity.
  SocArXiv, 2022.
Jingfeng Yang, Hongye Jin, Ruixiang Tang, Xiaotian Han, Qizhang Feng, Haom-
  ing Jiang, Bing Yin, and Xia Hu. Harnessing the power of llms in practice:
  A survey on chatgpt and beyond. Preprint arXiv:2304.13712, 2023.

Kai-Cheng Yang, Onur Varol, Clayton A Davis, Emilio Ferrara, Alessandro
 Flammini, and Filippo Menczer. Arming the public with artificial intelligence
 to counter social bots. Human Behavior and Emerging Technologies, 1(1):48–
 61, 2019.
Kai-Cheng Yang, Onur Varol, Pik-Mai Hui, and Filippo Menczer. Scalable
 and Generalizable Social Bot Detection through Data Selection. Proceedings
 of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 34(01):1096–1103, 2020.
 ISSN 2374-3468.
Kai-Cheng Yang, Emilio Ferrara, and Filippo Menczer. Botometer 101: Social
 bot practicum for computational social scientists. Journal of Computational
 Social Science, pages 1–18, 2022.

Junjie Ye, Xuanting Chen, Nuo Xu, Can Zu, Zekai Shao, Shichun Liu, Yuhan
  Cui, Zeyang Zhou, Chao Gong, Yang Shen, et al. A Comprehensive Capability
  Analysis of GPT-3 and GPT-3.5 Series Models. Preprint arXiv:2303.10420,
  2023.

Xuandong Zhao, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Lei Li. Protecting language generation
 models via invisible watermarking. Preprint arXiv:2302.03162, 2023.
Jiawei Zhou, Yixuan Zhang, Qianni Luo, Andrea G Parker, and Munmun
  De Choudhury. Synthetic lies: Understanding ai-generated misinformation
  and evaluating algorithmic and human solutions. In Proceedings of the CHI
  Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA,
  2023. ACM.




                                      27
