Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

# ScienceDirect

Cognitive Systems Research 38 (2016) 4–13 www.elsevier.com/locate/cogsys

# Stigmergy as a universal coordination mechanism I: Definition and components

## Francis Heylighen

Evolution, Complexity and Cognition Group, Center Leo Apostel, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Krijgskundestraat 33, B-1160 Brussels, Belgium

Available online 11 December 2015

Abstract

The concept of stigmergy has been used to analyze self-organizing activities in an ever-widening range of domains, including social insects, robotics, web communities and human society. Yet, it is still poorly understood and as such its full power remains underappre- ciated. The present paper clarifies the issue by defining stigmergy as a mechanism of indirect coordination in which the trace left by an action in a medium stimulates subsequent actions. It then analyses the fundamental concepts used in the definition: action, agent, med- ium, trace and coordination. It clarifies how stigmergy enables complex, coordinated activity without any need for planning, control, communication, simultaneous presence, or even mutual awareness. The resulting self-organization is driven by a combination of positive and negative feedbacks, amplifying beneficial developments while suppressing errors. Thus, stigmergy is applicable to a very broad vari- ety of cases, from chemical reactions to bodily coordination and Internet-supported collaboration in Wikipedia. 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Stigmergy; Coordination; Actions; Agents; Self-organization; Feedback

1. Past, present and future of the stigmergy concept The insight came from Grasse´’s observation of how termites repair their nest. He noted that initially termites wan- The concept of stigmergy was proposed by the French der around more or less randomly, carrying mud and entomologist Pierre-Paul Grasse´ (Grasse´, 1959) to describe depositing it here or there. However, the deposits that are a mechanism of coordination used by insects. The principle created in this haphazard way then stimulate the insects is that work performed by an agent leaves a trace in the to add more mud in the same place. Thus, the small heaps environment that stimulates the performance of subsequent quickly grow into columns that eventually come together work—by the same or other agents. This mediation via the to form an intricate cathedral of interlocking arches. The environment ensures that tasks are executed in the right only communication between the termites is indirect: the order, without any need for planning, control, or direct partially executed work of the ones provides information interaction between the agents. The notion of stigmergy to the others about where to make their own contribution. allowed Grasse´ to solve the ‘‘coordination paradox’’ Another classic example of stigmergy can be found in (Theraulaz & Bonabeau, 1999), i.e. the question of how the pheromone trails left by ants that come back from a insects of very limited intelligence, without apparent com-food source (Sumpter & Beekman, 2003). The pheromone munication, manage to collaboratively tackle complex pro-stimulates other ants to follow the same path. When they jects, such as building a nest. find food, they too will reinforce the pheromone trail while following the trail back to the nest. This mechanism leads to the emergence of an efficient network of trails E-mail address: fheyligh@vub.ac.be

[http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cogsys.2015.12.002](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cogsys.2015.12.002) 1389-0417/ 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

---

connecting the nest via the shortest routes to all the major
food sources.
Up to about 1990, the notion of stigmergy appears to

Up to about 1990, the notion of stigmergy appears to
have remained limited to a small circle of researchers studying the behavior of social insects. However, one of these
insect specialists, Jean-Louis Deneubourg, was also a member of the ‘‘Brussels School’’ of complex systems, headed
by the late Nobel Prize in chemistry, Ilya Prigogine. In this
interdisciplinary environment, it became clear that stigmergy was a prime example of spontaneous ordering or
self-organization (Camazine et al., 2003; Deneubourg,
1977) and as such potentially applicable to complex systems other than insect societies.
With the advent of the agent-based paradigm in com-

tems other than insect societies.
With the advent of the agent-based paradigm in computer simulation, insect societies were conceptualized as
swarms of simple agents that are able to perform complex
tasks using various forms of self-organization and especially stigmergy (Deneubourg, Theraulaz, & Beckers,
1992). The general ability to tackle complex problems
exhibited by such self-organizing multi-agent collectives
became known as swarm intelligence (Bonabeau, Dorigo,
& Theraulaz, 1999; Kennedy, 2006). One class of stigmergic mechanisms in particular, so-called ant algorithms,
turned out to be surprisingly powerful in tackling a variety
of computational problems, including the notorious traveling salesman problem (Dorigo, Bonabeau, & Theraulaz,
2000) and the optimization of packet routing along communication networks (Kassabalidis, El-Sharkawi, Marks,
Arabshahi, & Gray, 2001).
Stigmergy was applied not only to software agents, but

Stigmergy was applied not only to software agents, but
to their hardware analogues: autonomous robots. Groups
of very primitive robots proved able to tackle non-trivial
tasks, such as clustering items in different groupings, in a
way similar to ants (Beckers, Holland, & Deneubourg,
1994; Deneubourg et al., 1991; Holland & Melhuish,
1999). These robotic implementations inspired the application of stigmergic models to problems of coordination and
control in manufacturing (Valckenaers, Van Brussel,
Kollingbaum, & Bochmann, 2006). After this expansion
of the stigmergy concept from social insects to the domains
of artificial life, artificial intelligence and behavior-based
robotics, a perhaps obvious next step was computersupported collaboration between human agents, in particular via the world-wide web (Bolici, Howison, & Crowston,
2009; Dron, Boyne, & Mitchell, 2001; Elliott, 2007;
Heylighen, 1999).
A prototypical example is Wikipedia, the free web ency-

of stigmergic self-organization is the ‘‘invisible hand’’ of
the market: the actions of buying and selling leave a trace
by affecting the price of the transacted commodities. This
price in turn stimulates further transactions. Via the related
conceptions of distributed cognition and the extended
mind, stigmergy has now also started to make its mark
on theories of cognition and epistemology (Marsh &
Onof, 2008; Ricci, Omicini, Viroli, Gardelli, & Oliva,
2006; Susi & Ziemke, 2001).
It is clear that since 1990, the concept of stigmergy has

2006; Susi & Ziemke, 2001).
It is clear that since 1990, the concept of stigmergy has
undergone a rapid diffusion across an ever-growing number of application domains. I contend in this paper that
the potential for theoretical explanation and practical
application of the stigmergy concept is much larger still
than hitherto assumed. What (Parunak, 2006) noted about
human institutions, that the more difficult issue is to find
examples where stigmergy does not apply, extends to complex systems in general. When properly defined, the mechanism of stigmergy appears to be nearly ubiquitous and
able to illuminate a variety of conceptual problems in a
non-trivial manner.
The matter of definition, however, is crucial to a proper

non-trivial manner.
The matter of definition, however, is crucial to a proper
understanding and application. Definitions in the literature
tend to be vague, restricted in scope and mutually incoherent (Dipple, Raymond, & Docherty, 2014; Shell & Mataric,
2003). Misunderstandings have arisen particularly because
of a confusion between the general notion of stigmergy and
its specific instantiation in ant algorithms, i.e. the reinforcement with pheromones of frequently traveled paths by virtual ‘‘ants’’. The depositing of pheromone traces is an
example of what can be called quantitative, marker-based
stigmergy (Parunak, 2006). Stigmergy in the most general
sense does not require either markers or quantities.
Another, even more common misunderstanding is that
stigmergy only concerns groups or swarms consisting of
many agents. As we will show, stigmergy is just as important for understanding the behavior of a single individual.
The present paper will clarify the meaning of stigmergy,
propose an unambiguous definition and summarize its benefits in explaining spontaneous forms of coordination.
Perhaps a last question to conclude this introductory

efits in explaining spontaneous forms of coordination.
Perhaps a last question to conclude this introductory
section: if stigmergy is so fundamental, ubiquitous and
explanatorily powerful, then why has it taken so long for
it to be recognized? The more obvious answer is that the
study of termites that gave rise to this conception is a very
specific discipline with no evident applications to other
sciences. Moreover, the defining publication (Grasse´,
1959), appearing in French in a specialized journal, only
reached a limited audience. Its reach appears to have
widened significantly only after Deneubourg, a researcher
active in both French and English and the domains of both
social insects and self-organizing systems, started applying
the concept outside of its original context.
But why did not someone else come up with this simple we observe. If we note that agents act in a coordinated way,
our natural inclination is to seek the cause of one agent’s
behavior directly in another agent’s behavior, assuming
that there is an immediate communication from the one
to other. Failing to find this link, we assume that the agents
are driven by the same cause, such as a shared instinct,
plan, or leader that controls their behavior. We do not
spontaneously consider the option that one agent may
drive another agent’s behavior only via the indirect route
of an unintentional trace left in a passive environment.
This counter-intuitive aspect may explain why there is

This counter-intuitive aspect may explain why there is
still so much confusion surrounding the concept of stigmergy and why the breadth and power of its applications
have not yet been fully appreciated. I hope that the present
paper will help to truly clarify the mechanism and convince
researchers to further broaden their search for applications.

2. From etymology to definition

The term ‘‘stigmergy’’ was derived by Grasse´ from the
Greek roots, stigma, which means ‘‘mark or puncture’’
(typically referring to the tattoo used to mark slaves) and
ergon which can mean ‘‘work, action, or the product of
work’’. Grasse´ motivated this derivation by interpreting
stigma as a goad, prod or spur, i.e. a stinging movement
(‘‘piqure’’ in the original French text) that incites activity.
Ergon is then the result of previous work responsible for
this stimulus or incitement. Thus, (Grasse´, 1959) defined
stigmergy as ‘‘the stimulation of workers by the very performances they have achieved’’ (from the original English
abstract).
However, in a more recent review paper, (Parunak,

This brings me to my own definition:

abstract).
However, in a more recent review paper, (Parunak,
2006) proposes a different reading of the Greek etymology
that is at least as compelling: if we interpret stigma as
‘‘mark’’ or ‘‘sign’’ and ergon as ‘‘action’’, then stigmergy
is ‘‘the notion that an agent’s actions leave signs in the
environment, signs that it and other agents sense and that
determine their subsequent actions’’. Summarizing, in
Grasse´’s interpretation the product of work (ergon) functions as a stimulus (stigma) for action; in Parunak’s interpretation, action (ergon) leaves a mark (stigma). While
this double interpretation may seem to add to the confusion, it actually provides an elegant illustration of the
bidirectional nature of stigmergy. The process described
by both Grasse´ and Parunak is a feedback loop, where
an action produces a mark which in turn incites an action,
which produces another mark and so on (see Fig. 1). In
other words, actions stimulate their own continued execution via the intermediary of the marks they make—where
a mark is a perceivable effect, trace or product of an
action.
This brings me to my own definition:

Fig. 1. The stigmergic feedback loop.

3. Basic components of stigmergy

Let us analyze the different terms in this definition and
from thereon the conceptual components necessary to
build a stigmergic process.
Most primitive is the concept of action, which I interpret

build a stigmergic process.
Most primitive is the concept of action, which I interpret
as a causal process that produces a change in the state of
the world. Normally, we assume that an action is performed by an agent, which is typically seen as an autonomous, goal-directed system. However, the concept of
agent does not appear to be necessary for a definition of
stigmergy: the mechanism applies perfectly well to the
coordination of actions performed by a single, unspecified
agent, in which case there is no need to identify different
agents. Moreover, further extensions of the stigmergy concept can even do away with the notion of agent altogether
and consider the coordination of ‘‘agentless’’ actions that
are merely events or physical processes—such as chemical
reactions (e.g. Tabony, 2006). This views fits in with the
ontology of action (Heylighen, 2011; Turchin, 1993), which
sees action as the primitive element from which all other
concepts are derived. The concept of agent remains useful,
though, in cases where we wish to distinguish different
agents able to perform different actions.
As causal processes, actions have an antecedent or cause

As causal processes, actions have an antecedent or cause
and a consequent or effect. In simple agent-based models
used in artificial intelligence the antecedent is usually called
condition and the consequent simply action. The condition
specifies the state of the world in which the action occurs,
while the action specifies the subsequent transformation
of that state. The causal relation is represented as a ‘‘production rule’’, which consists of the simple relation:

IF condition holds, THEN perform action

For example, a thermostat obeys the production rule: IF
the temperature is below the goal temperature, THEN switch on the heating (Heylighen & Joslyn, 2003). While
this reading seems to imply an elementary cognitive process
of sensation or perception, to ascertain whether the condition holds, the notation is equally applicable to agentless,
physical processes. For example, consider the following
chemical reaction:

N a0H+H C\rightarrow N a C l+H_{2}O

The first part represents the necessary condition for the
reaction to occur: an NaOH molecule and an HCl molecule
must be simultaneously present. The second part of the
reaction represents the product or result of the reaction:
the formation of an NaCl molecule together with an H2O
molecule. More generally, we can write such reactions in
the following form (where the ‘‘+’’ operators represents a
conjunction of the conditions or resources necessary for
the process to take place):

\mathrm{H_{2}O}

a+b+\cdots\rightarrow x+y+\cdots

Chemical Organization Theory (Dittrich & Fenizio,
2007) is a formal framework that shows how collections
of such simple reactions tend to become coordinated by
acting on a shared medium, the ‘‘reaction vessel’’, where
they produce an evolving trace expressed by the concentrations of the different ‘‘molecules’’ (a, b, ...). This coordinated pattern of activity defines an ‘‘organization’’: a
self-sustaining, dynamic network of interacting ‘‘molecules’’. While the inspiration for this model comes from
chemistry, it is equally applicable to other kinds of
abstract actions in which the agent is ignored—such as
political and economic interactions (Dittrich & Winter,
2005, 2008).
According to our definition, the action part of a rule

According to our definition, the action part of a rule
produces a change in the state of the world. This means
that it creates a new condition, which may activate another
condition ! action rule and thus a new action. For example, the thermostat, by switching on the heating, will eventually produce the new condition ‘‘temperature high
enough’’, which in turn will trigger the new action ‘‘switch
heating off’’ (Heylighen & Joslyn, 2003). The NaCL molecule may react with another molecule in the solution and
thus produce yet another compound. This triggering of
an action by a previous action via the intermediary of its
result is precisely what Grasse´ defined as stigmergy. Yet,
the way we arrived at this notion is so simple and general
that it merely requires a minimal assumption of causality.
In the next sections, we will need to explain how such a
simple mechanism can produce such rich and unexpected
phenomena.

P ðactionjconditionÞ > P ðactionÞ;

\ {mathfrak f f}^{2

where P(A) is the general probability of A occurring and P
(A|B) the conditional probability of A occurring given that
B is the case.
Note that in some cases, a condition may on the con-

Note that in some cases, a condition may on the contrary inhibit an action, i.e. make it less likely. For example,
the presence of a red light makes it less likely that someone
would cross the street. In that case, we may still keep to the
definition of ‘‘stimulation’’ above, simply by considering
the opposite or negation of that condition as the stimulus:
e.g. the disappearance of a red light makes it more likely
that someone would cross the street.
We must now introduce another core component of stig-

that someone would cross the street.
We must now introduce another core component of stigmergic activity, the medium. The medium is that part of the
world that undergoes changes through the actions and
whose states are sensed as conditions for further actions.
The medium is a non-trivial entity, since many aspects of
the world are either not affected by actions, or not perceivable as conditions for new actions. For example, while I
can clearly see the clouds in the sky, no matter how hard
I try, I cannot change their position. Vice-versa, I have
the power to throw a rock in the sea, but I cannot see where
that rock will end up. In either case, there is no basis for a
stigmergic chain of actions triggering further actions. On
the other hand, I can both perceive and affect the arrangement of sand on a beach and this allows me to build an
intricate sand castle via a coordinated sequence of condition ! action pairs. Neither the sea nor the sky is a stigmergic medium, but the beach is.
Note that most authors (e.g. Parunak, 2006) use the

Note that most authors (e.g. Parunak, 2006) use the
term ‘‘environment’’ for what I call ‘‘medium’’. This term
is much less accurate, though. First, as noted, the environment is not in general both perceivable and controllable.
Second, the environment normally denotes everything outside the system or agent under consideration. However,
stigmergy can also make use of an internal medium. For
example, different physiological processes in the body communicate via the release of hormones in the bloodstream
(medium). This communication is indirect: e.g. the liver
does not directly send a message to the brain; both merely
‘‘read’’ the hormonal messages deposited in the blood that
irrigates both. More generally, many aspects of the agent’s
own state, such as the agent’s position, speed and orientation, belong to the medium, since they are controllable and
perceivable by self and others.
Finally, if we conceive the environment as that part of

Finally, if we conceive the environment as that part of
the world that interacts with an agent, then different agents
live in different environments or ‘‘Umwelts’’: not all phenomena perceivable or controllable by one agent are similarly perceivable and controllable by another agent. When
we consider stigmergic coordination between different
agents, we need to define the medium as that part of the
world that is controllable and perceivable by all of them.
This is necessary to ensure that the different agents can
interact via the medium. The role of the medium is to allow
interaction or communication between different actions and thus, indirectly, between the agents that perform the
actions. It is this mediating function that underlies the true
power of stigmergy (Heylighen, 2006).
A final component of a stigmergic system is the mark or

A final component of a stigmergic system is the mark or
trace, i.e. the perceivable change made in the medium by
an action, which may trigger a subsequent action. I prefer
the term ‘‘trace’’ because it can denote an unplanned or even
undesired side effect of the action, unlike a ‘‘mark’’ which is
normally made intentionally. Some forms of stigmergy rely
on intentionally made signs or signals (‘‘markers’’), but in
the most general situation, this is not the case. The trace is
a consequence of the action and as such, it carries information about the action that produced it. We might see the trace
as a message, deposited in the medium, through which the
pattern of activity communicates with itself, while maintaining a continuously updated ‘‘memory’’ of its achievements.
From the point of view of an individual agent, on the

ing a continuously updated ‘‘memory’’ of its achievements.
From the point of view of an individual agent, on the
other hand, the trace is a challenge: a situation that incites
action, in order to remedy a perceived problem or shortcoming, or to exploit an opportunity for advancement
(Heylighen, 2012). We may assume may here that agents
have a minimal form of intentionality. This means that
their actions are not random, like the mutations that
underlie biological evolution, but directed toward the
agent’s preferred state or goal. Reaching a far-away goal,
however, requires more than a minimal intelligence: this
will typically necessitate a complex scheme of actions, performed according to a specific order or logic. The difficulties involved in problem solving, planning and project
management may remind us that there is no obvious way
to go from elementary actions to complex activity schemes.
This brings us to the problem of coordination (Crowston,
1997), which stigmergy appears to solve.

4. Coordination

the organization of the different elements of a complex body
or activity so as to enable them to work together effectively.

(1) one action can be prerequisite for the next action: the
product or output of the first is a necessary condition
or input for the second. This determines the sequential organization of the process, or workflow, where
activity moves step-by-step through a sequence of
tasks (what needs to be done next?).
(2) two actions can require the same condition (input)

(2) two actions can require the same condition (input)
and/or contribute to the same effect or goal (output),
i.e. they are performed in parallel. This determines
the division of labor between agents (who is to do
what?).

Effective coordination means that the right actions are
performed by the right agents at the right time and place.
Let us consider the building of a house as an activity that
requires coordination between its different tasks. The task
of laying electricity obviously can only be performed once
the windows and roof are installed. Roofing is therefore
prerequisite for laying electricity and the electricians will
have to wait until the roofers are finished. Plastering the
interior walls, on the other hand, can only be done after
the electrical cables and outlets have been dug into the
walls. This implies the sequence: roofing ! laying electricity ! plastering. On the other hand, plumbing and laying
electricity can be performed simultaneously or in parallel,
since they both require roofing and are prerequisite for
plastering, but are otherwise independent of each other.
The dependencies or connections between these different
processes can be represented in the following ‘‘workflow’’
diagram (Fig. 2).
This diagram represents only a small part of the com-

diagram (Fig. 2).
This diagram represents only a small part of the complex of activities that is necessary to construct a building.
Construction work and other complex activities are normally planned in detail beforehand, using tools such as
project schedules and GANTT charts, to specify the
dependencies between the different tasks. This planning
is necessary to make sure that the work is efficiently performed, by avoiding situations such as the plasterers turning up when the plumbing is still going on so that they
cannot start their work. The plan will normally specify
the beginning and end of all the actions as well as the
agents that are to perform them and possibly the places
or resources that the agents need to access. If everybody
keeps to this plan, the plasterers will show up on the exact
time and place that the plumbers are supposed to have
finished their work.
The problem with planning, of course, is that there will

---

Fig. 2. Parallel and sequential connections between tasks.

A pensioner watches two city workers busy in the municipal
park. The one digs a series of deep holes at regular intervals.
The other one then shovels the mounds of earth carefully
back into each hole and flattens the soil. The pensioner asks
him: “Isn't that a waste of effort what you are doing?”,to
which the worker replies: “No, we always work this way
and it is very efficient. It is just that the third guy who plants
the trees did not show up today.”

One way to deal with such contingencies is to let the
agents communicate about their work. For example, the
plumbers finishing early or late could call the plasterers
to warn them about the different finishing date. However,
this assumes that agents know all other agents that depend
on their work and have a general notion of what these
dependencies are so that they can improvise or reschedule
their activity in the light of the new information. With complex activities, this is tricky and can easily lead to misunderstandings or confusions that make things worse. An
alternative is that all agents report to a supervisor, who
keeps track of the plan, reschedules if need be and warns
everyone involved of the changes. However, such central
controller becomes a bottleneck that is even more sensitive
to disturbances, creating the risk that the whole plan falls
apart because the supervisor is not available to pass on
reschedules.

How does stigmergy solve the problem of coordination?
In the examples above, the different agents would regularly
check the situation at the work site and as soon as they
encounter the right conditions, they would start their work.
For example, once the plumbers observe that the roof and
windows are in place, they would start plumbing. Simultaneously but independently, the electricians would do their
job. The plasterers would begin as soon as both the plumbing and the electricity are finished. On the other hand, the
municipal worker would fill a hole only on the condition
that it contains a tree.
While this approach may seem natural for termites, who

5. The benefits of stigmergy

demand that specialized workers visit the site every day
while they are not yet needed. However, this can be easily
tackled with modern technology, by providing a website on
which the state of the work is registered in real time. In this
way, the plumbers can see immediately whether they are
needed, without losing time traveling to the site. The website plays the role of a medium providing special markers to
guide the execution of the work—similar to the pheromones used by ants.
This is in essence how a community of programmers

mones used by ants.
This is in essence how a community of programmers
residing in different parts of the world collaboratively
develop a complex suite of open-source software: they regularly check their shared website for new modules, updates,
requests for features, or postings of bugs. They address
these challenges by writing additional code or suggesting
solutions, posting these results in turn on the website for
others to see and to elaborate (Bolici et al., 2009;
Heylighen, 2007; Heylighen, Kostov, & Kiemen, 2013).
Such open source development has proven to be at least
as effective as the traditional planned software development performed in large corporations (Weber, 2004), without requiring any central supervision or other complicated
arrangements (Raymond, 1999).
Perhaps the only disadvantage compared to a perfectly
designed and executed plan, is that the stigmergic approach

arrangements (Raymond, 1999).
Perhaps the only disadvantage compared to a perfectly
designed and executed plan, is that the stigmergic approach
does not guarantee an optimal use of the ‘‘workforce’’.
While the roofers are working, the plumbers must either
wait or perform another task. If they are busy with another
task, there is no guarantee that it will be finished exactly
when the roofers finish their job. This suboptimal use of
workers can be minimized by creating a pool of available
workers (much) larger than needed for this particular job,
so that together they can keep track of several jobs in parallel. Assuming that the tasks do not all start at the same
time, there would always be some workers available for
any job that opens up, without requiring workers to wait
long times in between jobs, or tasks to wait long for workers to execute them. This is the approach underlying the job
ticketing systems used in call centers (Heylighen & Vidal,
2008; Orrick, Bauer, & McDuffie, 2000), but also the one
used by ants and termites. It explains why the bestknown applications of stigmergy typically rely on ‘‘massive
parallelism’’, i.e. many agents active simultaneously

---

(Manderick & Moyson, 1988). In the case of software
development, there is no particular time at which a coding
job has to be done, so programmers can be flexible in
deciding when to produce an improvement suggested by
the stigmergic repository of tasks and products.
With such a stigmergic organization, no conflicts

the stigmergic repository of tasks and products.
With such a stigmergic organization, no conflicts
between instructions and reality arise, no needless delays
occur and no effort is wasted—whatever the contingencies
that may disturb the plan. Moreover, this solution is perfectly robust and independent of any errors in communication or control. It also does not depend on the number of
agents, tasks, or dependencies between tasks. This allows
it to scale up to tasks of indefinite sizes. The only requirements are that the agents can recognize the right conditions
to start their work and that they can all access the medium
in which these conditions are registered. In summary, stigmergy provides an extremely simple and reliable solution to
a problem that is potentially unlimited in complexity.
Compared to traditional methods of organization, stig-

Compared to traditional methods of organization, stigmergy makes absolutely minimal demands on the agents.
In particular, in stigmergic collaboration there is no need
for:

planning or anticipation: agents only need to know the
present state of the activity; the overall goal, next step
or end result is irrelevant for their present work. In
Wikipedia, there is no plan specifying which information should be added to the encyclopedia when.
memory: agents do not need to remember their previous

memory: agents do not need to remember their previous
activity; no information about the state of the work
needs to be stored anywhere except in the medium.
communication: no information needs to be transferred

the condition and the quicker it will be to start the job;
in this way, tasks are automatically assigned to the most
competent agents (Heylighen & Vidal, 2008).
commitment: agents do no need to commit to a particu-

simultaneous presence: there is in general no need for the
agents to be present at the same time or at the same
place; tasks are registered in the medium so that they
can be picked up by agents whenever and wherever they
are available. That is how worldwide communities can
collaborate on a single software project.
imposed sequence: actions are performed automatically

commitment: agents do no need to commit to a particular task (in contradiction to what (Jennings, 1993)
claims about multi-agent coordination); an agent decides on the spot what work it should do, depending on
opportunity and other contingent conditions; an agent
that quits or otherwise becomes unavailable is automatically replaced by another one.
centralized control or supervision: errors or perturbations

centralized control or supervision: errors or perturbations
are automatically corrected, as they merely create a new
condition stimulating new actions to deal with the challenge; the activity is self-organizing. For example, bugs
in open-source software are spotted by users and
resolved by other contributors.

6. Self-organization through negative feedback

This last point deserves an elaboration. Our assumption
is that agents are individually goal-directed. Cybernetics
has shown how goal-directedness emerges from negative
feedback: perceived deviations from the goal are compensated by counteractions (Heylighen & Joslyn, 2003;
Rosenblueth, Wiener, & Bigelow, 1943). This most basic
mode of steering is also called error-controlled regulation:
whatever the origin of the deviation or ‘‘error’’, once it is
sensed, its effect is suppressed by a compensatory action.
This control mode does not require any anticipation (feedforward), memory, or understanding of what caused the
deviation. To efficiently control the effect, it is sufficient
that the agent is able to exert an influence in the ‘‘opposite
direction’’ of any deviation, independently of its underlying
cause (Gershenson & Heylighen, 2005).
This mechanism is well understood for individual agents

cause (Gershenson & Heylighen, 2005).
This mechanism is well understood for individual agents
(Powers, 1973). Stigmergy illustrates how it can be
extended to several interacting agents. Imagine a group
of non-communicating agents (e.g. ants, or people who
do not speak a common language) pushing a large obstacle
out of the way across an irregular terrain. Individually,
each agent will correct its course based on the perceived
movement of the load: e.g. if it shifts too much to the left,
the agent will push more toward the right. It does not matter whether the deviation was caused by a hole in the surface, a sudden gust of wind, or the misdirected action of
another agent. The overall movement will be determined
by the sum of the actions performed by all the individuals.
As long as the agents push in generally the same direction,
it is irrelevant who did what. The agents can work perfectly
independently—perhaps even without knowing that someone else is pushing too—while still producing a coordinated movement.
A similar mechanism is probably involved in bodily movement, such as balancing on one foot, requires the
simultaneous contraction or relaxation of many muscles.
If the actual position deviates from the desired one, individual muscles will adjust their level of contraction, upward
or downward, depending on the perceived direction of the
deviation. Since all muscles have simultaneous access to the
shared ‘‘trace’’ of their activity (the present position), they
also act on it simultaneously. The sum of their actions will
normally be sufficient to achieve the desired effect. If not—
that is, if one of the muscles contributes too little or too
much—either that muscle itself or one or more complementary muscles will react in order to correct the error. The
muscles do not need to communicate with each other about
their intention to shift position: their actions are instantly
coordinated by their simultaneous effect on the trace, just
like the actions of the agents pushing the load are coordinated by the perceived position of the load.
To ensure effective collective action, the only assump-

nated by the perceived position of the load.
To ensure effective collective action, the only assumption we need to add to individual error-controlled regulation is that the goals of the agents are not
contradictory—i.e. that error decrease for one agent does
not equal error increase for another agent—because then
the agents will be involved in a tug-of-war of opposing
counteractions. However, note that the goals do not need
to be identical for coordination to occur: imagine that
one group of agents pushes the obstacle to the east, while
another group pushes to the north. The net effect is that
the load will move northeast, satisfying both groups. It is
only when one group pushes eastward and another group
westward that a conflict arises, without possibility for a
compromise. In this two-dimensional example, the probability for conflict still seems large. However, the larger
the number of aspects, components or degrees of freedom
of the problem situation, the more freedom there is for
agents to focus on different goals without getting in each
others’ way.
This independence of goal setting is what underlies the

others’ way.
This independence of goal setting is what underlies the
automatic division of labor: each agent spontaneously
focuses on the task that it deems most important (and
for which it is in general most competent). Thus, a variety
of agents together can potentially tackle very complex
problems that require the achievement, in sequence or in
parallel, of many different partial objectives. We may
assume that agents have acquired their condition-action
rules (and thus their implicit goals) through natural selection of instinctual behavior or differential reinforcement
of learned behavior. This means that their conditionaction rules are generally appropriate to the local environment, including the other agents with which they regularly
interact. Rules that are frequently in conflict with the rules
of other agents or the constraints of the environment are
likely to be eliminated eventually (Heylighen, 2008).
Therefore, it is plausible to assume that even very different agents, e.g. belonging to different species in an ecosystem, follow rules that are potentially synergetic (Corning,

coordinating initially independent actions into a harmonious whole. Thus, the group of agents can achieve much
more substantial results collectively than they would if they
would work alone. It is this emergence of global order out
of local actions that constitutes the hallmark of selforganization (Heylighen, 2001).

7. Self-organization through positive feedback

Stigmergy exhibits another fundamental ‘‘signature’’ of
self-organization (Heylighen, 2001; Theraulaz &
Bonabeau, 1999): positive feedback. Error-controlled regulation assumes negative feedback: the reduction of deviations away from the goal. However, goal-directed action
can also make use of positive feedback: the amplification
of movements toward the goal. In the cybernetic perspective, changes in the situation not controlled by the agent
are interpreted as perturbations, since they move the system away from a previously achieved goal state
(Heylighen & Joslyn, 2003; Maturana & Varela, 1980).
However, as long as no final goal is reached—which is
the default situation in long-term, on-going projects, such
as building, extending and maintaining a termite hill—such
contingent events may as well facilitate as hinder the further movement toward the goal. When they hinder, we will
call them disturbances; when they facilitate, we may call
them affordances (Gibson, 1977). In the most general case,
we may call them diversions, since they divert action from
its on-going course, whether in a positive, negative or neutral way (Heylighen, 2012). Assuming that agents are goaldirected, we may infer that they will counteract the disturbances and reinforce or build upon the affordances.
Let us illustrate these notions with the paradigmatic case

Let us illustrate these notions with the paradigmatic case
of termites erecting a pillar as part of their nest construction. A bit of mud that is accidentally dropped in a particular place, either by a termite, the wind or a passing bird,
constitutes a diversion. In this case, the diversion constitutes an affordance, since it provides a foundation on which
a taller mud structure can be erected. Stigmergic stimulation
will lead termites to add mud to the emerging heap, rather
than to the flat surfaces surrounding it. The taller the heap
grows, the stronger the stimulus it will exert on termites
passing by and therefore the faster its further growth. This
positive feedback loop results in an accelerated exploitation
of the opportunity, diverting effort away from less promising alternatives and thus efficiently allocating agents and
resources to the most productive activities.
Suppose now that a fragment of the thus erected column course, this event neither facilitates nor hinders the work.
Therefore, it will be neither counteracted nor reinforced.
A similar dynamics occurs in Internet communities

A similar dynamics occurs in Internet communities
centered on a particular forum, website or page. More
activity on a particular site tends to produce more
interesting traces, such as discussions, wiki pages, or
comments. These attract more people and therefore more
contributions, which in turn incite more activity. Vice
versa, less activity reduces the level of interest for the
products of that activity and thus the number of potential
further contributions. Thus, web communities and their
activities are subject to a positive feedback, where the initially most promising ‘‘projects’’ grow very quickly, while
the less promising ones dwindle, losing the competition
with the others and potentially disappearing altogether.
In this way, work is divided efficiently across a wide
variety of projects, ensuring that the most promising ones
quickly ‘‘take off’’ without dissipating too much energy in
less promising ones.

8. Conclusion

Beckers, R., Holland, O. E., & Deneubourg, J. L. (1994). From local
actions to global tasks: Stigmergy and collective robotics. Artificial
Life IV, 181, 189.
Bolici, F., Howison, J., & Crowston, K. (2009). Coordination without
discussion? Socio-technical congruence and stigmergy in free and open
source software projects. In Conjunction with the international conference on software engineering, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Bonabeau, E., Dorigo, M., & Theraulaz, G. (1999). Swarm intelligence:
From natural to artificial systems. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Camazine, S., Deneubourg, J. L., Franks, N. R., Sneyd, J., Theraula, G.,
& Bonabeau, E. (2003). Self-organization in biological systems.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Corning, P. A. (1995). Synergy and self-organization in the evolution of
complex systems. Systems Research, 12(2), 89–122.
Crowston, K. (1997). A coordination theory approach to organizational
process design. Organization Science, 8(2), 157–175.
Deneubourg, J. L. (1977). Application de l’ordre par fluctuations a la
description de certaines etapes de la construction du nid chez les
termites. Insectes Sociaux, 24(2), 117–130.
Deneubourg, J. L., Goss, S., Franks, N., Sendova-Franks, A., Detrain, C.,
& Chre´tien, L. (1991). The dynamics of collective sorting robot-like
ants and ant-like robots. In Proceedings of the first international
conference on simulation of adaptive behavior on from animals to
animats (pp. 356–363).
Deneubourg, J. L., Theraulaz, G., & Beckers, R. (1992). Swarm-made
architectures. In Toward a practice of autonomous systems: Proceedings
of the first European conference on artificial life.
Dipple, A., Raymond, K., & Docherty, M. (2014). General theory of
stigmergy: Modelling stigma semantics. Cognitive Systems Research,
31–32, 61–92.
Dittrich, P., & Winter, L. (2005). Reaction networks as a formal
mechanism to explain social phenomena. In Proc. fourth int. workshop
on agent-based approaches in economics and social complex systems
(AESCS 2005) (pp. 9–13). <http://users.minet.uni-jena.de/~dittrich/
p/DW2005.pdf>.
Dittrich, P., & Fenizio, P. S. di (2007). Chemical organisation theory.
Bulletin of Mathematical Biology, 69(4), 1199–1231.
Dittrich, P., & Winter, L. (2008). Chemical organizations in a toy model of
the political system. Advances in Complex Systems, 11(04), 609.
Dorigo, M., Bonabeau, E., & Theraulaz, G. (2000). Ant algorithms and
stigmergy. Future Generation Computing Systems, 16(8), 851–871.
Dron, J., Boyne, C., & Mitchell, R. (2001). Footpaths in the stuff swamp.
<http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED466580.pdf>.
Elliott, M. A. (2007). Stigmergic collaboration: A theoretical framework for
mass collaboration. PhD thesis, Victorian College of the Arts,
University of Melbourne. <http://eprints.infodiv.unimelb.edu.au/
00003977/01/elliott_phd_pub_08.10.07.pdf>.
Gershenson, C., & Heylighen, F. (2005). How can we think complex? In
K. Richardson (Ed.), Managing organizational complexity: Philosophy,
theory and application (pp. 47–61). Charlotte: Information Age
Publishing.
Gibson, J. J. (1977). The theory of affordances. In Perceiving, acting and
knowing: Toward an ecological psychology (pp. 67–82). Boston:
Houghton-Mifflin.
Grasse´, P. P. (1959). La reconstruction du nid et les coordinations
interindividuelles chez Bellicositermes natalensis et Cubitermes sp. La

supervision. Because of its non-intuitive nature, its power
of explanation is as yet poorly recognized. I hope that
the present paper will inspire further researchers to pick
up the thread and examine stigmergic mechanisms in an
ever-wider range of human and non-human activities. This
should not only clarify deep theoretical issues, but suggest
a variety of as yet unimagined practical applications.

Thus, stigmergy can be seen as a fundamental mechanism of self-organization: it allows global, coordinated
activity to emerge out of local, independent actions. Like
self-organization in general, stigmergy relies on feedback:
action elicits action, via the intermediary of the trace. This
feedback is typically positive, in that actions intensify and
elaborate the trace, thus eliciting more intense and diverse
further actions. The resulting virtuous cycle explains in
part why stigmergic organization is so surprisingly effective, enabling the construction of complex structures—such
as a termite hill, a network of trails, or a world encyclopedia—in a very short time, even when starting from scratch.
When necessary, feedback can also be negative: errors, disturbances or ‘‘overshoots’’ that make the trace deviate
from its ideal shape will elicit actions that correct the
deviation.
In conclusion, the concept of stigmergy allows us to

References the´orie de la stigmergie: Essai d’interpre´tation du comportement des
termites constructeurs. Insectes Sociaux, 6(1), 41–80.
Heylighen, F. (1999). Collective intelligence and its implementation on the

Heylighen, F. (1999). Collective intelligence and its implementation on the
web: Algorithms to develop a collective mental map. Computational
and Mathematical Organization Theory, 5(3), 253–280.
Heylighen, F. (2001). The science of self-organization and adaptivity. The

Heylighen, F. (2001). The science of self-organization and adaptivity. The
Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems, 5(3), 253–280.
Heylighen, F. (2006). Mediator evolution: A general scenario for the

Heylighen, F. (2006). Mediator evolution: A general scenario for the
origin of dynamical hierarchies. In Worldviews, science and us.
Singapore: World Scientific.
Heylighen, F. (2008). Accelerating socio-technological evolution: From

Heylighen, F. (2008). Accelerating socio-technological evolution: From
ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain. In Globalization as
evolutionary process: Modeling global change (pp. 284). New York:
Routledge.
Heylighen, F. (2011). Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: An

Heylighen, F. (2011). Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: An
action ontology for transdisciplinary integration. Integral Review.
Heylighen, F. (2012). A tale of challenge, adventure and mystery:

the´orie de la stigmergie: Essai d’interpre´tation du comportement des Manderick, B., & Moyson, F. (1988). The collective behavior of ants: An
example of self-organization in massive parallelism. In Proceedings of
Heylighen, F. (1999). Collective intelligence and its implementation on the the AAAI spring symposium on parallel models of intelligence, Stanford
web: Algorithms to develop a collective mental map. Computational University.
Marsh, L., & Onof, C. (2008). Stigmergic epistemology, stigmergic
Heylighen, F. (2001). The science of self-organization and adaptivity. The cognition. Cognitive Systems Research, 9(1), 136–149.
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (1980). Autopoiesis and cognition: The
the realization of the living. Dordrecht: Reidel.
us. Orrick, D., Bauer, J., & McDuffie, E. (2000). Remedial help desk 101 at
Florida State University. In Proceedings of the 28th annual ACM
Heylighen, F. (2008). Accelerating socio-technological evolution: From SIGUCCS conference on user services: Building the future
ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain. In Globalization as (pp. 222–226). New York: ACM.
evolutionary process: Modeling global change (pp. 284). New York: Parunak, H. V. D. (2006). A survey of environments and mechanisms for
human–human stigmergy. In D. Weyns, H. V. D. Parunak, & F.
Heylighen, F. (2011). Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: An Michel (Eds.), Environments for Multi-agent systems II (pp. 163–186).
Heidelberg: Springer.
mystery: Powers, W. T. (1973). Behavior: The control of perception. Chicago: Aldine
scientific Transaction.
Brussels, Raymond, E. (1999). The cathedral and the bazaar. Knowledge, Technology and Policy, 12(3), 23–49.
second-order Ricci, A., Omicini, A., Viroli, M., Gardelli, L., & Oliva, E. (2006).
(Ed.). Encyclopedia of physical science Cognitive stigmergy: A framework based on agents and artifacts. In
and technology (3rd ed., Vol. 4, pp. 155–169). New York: Academic Third international workshop on environments for multiagent systems
(E4MAS 06).
Heylighen, F., Kostov, I., & Kiemen, M. (2013). Mobilization systems: Robles, G., Merelo, J. J., & Gonzalez-Barahona, J. M. (2005). Self-
Technologies for motivating and coordinating human action. In M. A. organized development in libre software: A model based on the
Peters, T. Besley, & D. Araya (Eds.), The new development paradigm: stigmergy concept. In Proceedings of the 6th international workshop on
York: software process simulation and modeling (ProSim), 16.
Rosenblueth, A., Wiener, N., & Bigelow, J. (1943). Behavior, purpose and
successful? teleology. Philosophy of Science, 10(1), 18–24.
B. Shell, D., & Mataric, M. (2003). On the use of the term ‘‘‘stigmergy’.’’ In
source Proceedings of the second international workshop on the mathematics
and algorithms of social insects.
Heylighen, F. (2013). Self-organization in communicating groups: The Sumpter, D. J., & Beekman, M. (2003). From nonlinearity to optimality:
intelli-Pheromone trail foraging by ants. Animal Behaviour, 66(2), 273–280.
`. Massip-Bonet & A. Bastardas-Boada (Eds.), Complexity Susi, T., & Ziemke, T. (2001). Social cognition, artefacts and stigmergy: A
117–149). comparative analysis of theoretical frameworks for the understanding
of artefact-mediated collaborative activity. Cognitive Systems
Heylighen, F., & Vidal, C. (2008). Getting things done: The science behind Research, 2(4), 273–290.
Tabony, J. (2006). Microtubules viewed as molecular ant colonies. Biology
and of the Cell, 98, 603–617.
Theraulaz, G., & Bonabeau, E. (1999). A brief history of stigmergy.
Jennings, N. R. (1993). Commitments and conventions: The foundation of Artificial Life, 5(2), 97–116.
Engineering Turchin, V. F. (1993). The cybernetic ontology of action. Kybernetes, 22(2),
10–30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/eb005960.
Kassabalidis, I., El-Sharkawi, M., Marks, R., Arabshahi, P., & Gray, A. Valckenaers, P., Van Brussel, H., Kollingbaum, M., & Bochmann, O.
(2001). Swarm intelligence for routing in communication networks. In (2006). Multi-agent coordination and control using stigmergy applied
Global telecommunications conference, 2001. GLOBECOM’01. IEEE to manufacturing control. Multi-Agent Systems and Applications,
317–334.
Kennedy, J. (2006). Swarm intelligence. Handbook of nature-inspired and Weber, S. (2004). The success of open source. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Heylighen, F. (2012). A tale of challenge, adventure and mystery:
Towards an agent-based unification of narrative and scientific
models of behavior. ECCO working papers no. 2012-06. Brussels,
Belgium.
Heylighen, F., & Joslyn, C. (2003). Cybernetics and second-order

Heylighen, F., & Joslyn, C. (2003). Cybernetics and second-order
cybernetics. In R. A. Meyers (Ed.). Encyclopedia of physical science
and technology (3rd ed., Vol. 4, pp. 155–169). New York: Academic
Press.
Heylighen, F., Kostov, I., & Kiemen, M. (2013). Mobilization systems:

Press.
Heylighen, F., Kostov, I., & Kiemen, M. (2013). Mobilization systems:
Technologies for motivating and coordinating human action. In M. A.
Peters, T. Besley, & D. Araya (Eds.), The new development paradigm:
Education, knowledge economy and digital futures. New York:
Routledge.
Heylighen, F. (2007). Why is open access development so successful?

Heylighen, F. (2007). Why is open access development so successful?
Stigmergic organization and the economics of information. In B.
Lutterbeck, M. Baerwolff, & R. A. Gehring (Eds.), Open source
Jahrbuch 2007 (pp. 165–180). Lehmanns Media.
Heylighen, F. (2013). Self-organization in communicating groups: The

Heylighen, F. (2013). Self-organization in communicating groups: The
emergence of coordination, shared references and collective intelligence. In A`. Massip-Bonet & A. Bastardas-Boada (Eds.), Complexity
perspectives on language, communication and society (pp. 117–149).
Berlin: Springer.
Heylighen, F., & Vidal, C. (2008). Getting things done: The science behind

Heylighen, F., & Vidal, C. (2008). Getting things done: The science behind
stress-free productivity. Long Range Planning, 41(6), 585–605.
Holland, O., & Melhuish, C. (1999). Stigmergy, self-organization and

Jennings, N. R. (1993). Commitments and conventions: The foundation of
coordination in multi-agent systems. The Knowledge Engineering
Review, 8(03), 223–250.
Kassabalidis, I., El-Sharkawi, M., Marks, R., Arabshahi, P., & Gray, A.

Kassabalidis, I., El-Sharkawi, M., Marks, R., Arabshahi, P., & Gray, A.
(2001). Swarm intelligence for routing in communication networks. In
Global telecommunications conference, 2001. GLOBECOM’01. IEEE
(Vol. 6, pp. 3613–3617).
Kennedy, J. (2006). Swarm intelligence. Handbook of nature-inspired and

Kennedy, J. (2006). Swarm intelligence. Handbook of nature-inspired and
innovative computing (pp. 187–219). Heidelberg: Springer.